Part I: General Ordinances
Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Board of Health regulations — See Part III. Town Manager regulations — See Part IV.
1:1

ARTICLE I
Noncriminal Enforcement of Violations
[Adopted 11-5-1988, approved 1-3-1989; amended 12-19-1991;
6-5-2003 by Order No. 2003-091 (Art. I of Ch. IV of the General
Ordinances as updated through 7-7-2003)]
§ 1-1. Alternative method of enforcement.
Noncriminal disposition shall be an alternative method of enforcement of
Town ordinances.
§ 1-2. Enforcing officials designated.
Any ordinance of the Town of Barnstable, or rule or regulation of its
boards, commissions and committees, the violation of which is subject
to a specific penalty, may in the discretion of the Town official who is
the appropriate enforcing person, be enforced in the method provided
in § 21D of Chapter 40 of the General Laws. "Enforcing person," as used
in this article, shall mean:
The Town Manager or any police officer of the Town of Barnstable,
with respect to any offense; and
(1)
(2) The Airport Manager and his designees;
The Building Commissioner and his designees; [Amended
1-20-2005 by Order No. 2005-038]
(3)
(4) The Natural Resource Division Supervisor and his designees;
(5) The Conservation Agent and his designees;
(6) The Harbormaster and his designees;
(7) The Director of the Public Health Division and his designees;
The Director of Regulatory Services and his designees; [Amended
12-4-2008 by Order No. 2009-044]
(8)
(9) The Tree Warden and his designees; and
Such other officials as the Town Manager may from time to time
designate, each with respect to violation of ordinances and rules
and regulations within their respective jurisdictions.
(10)
A.
If more than one official has jurisdiction in a given case, any such
official may be an enforcing person with respect thereto.
B.
§ 1-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-3
1:3
§ 1-3. Schedule of Fines. [Amended 9-2-2004 by Order No.
2005-004; 11-4-2004 by Order No. 2005-019; 1-20-2005 by Order
No. 2005-038; 6-1-2006 by Order No. 2006-127; 9-2-2010 by Order
No. 2011-003; 5-5-2011 by Order No. 2011-097; 8-1-2013 by Order
No. 2013-043; 10-1-2015 by Order No. 2016-028]
The following shall be the schedule of fines for the method of enforcement
authorized by § 1-2:
Code Chapter/
Section Subject Fine
Ch. 17 Alarm system $100
Ch. 20, Art. I Alcoholic beverages (open
containers)
$200
Ch. 20, Art. II Alcoholic beverages (minors) $200
Ch. 24, Art. II,
§ 24-4
Keeping of roosters
First violation $25
Second violation $50
Third violation $100
Ch. 32, Art. I Operations of vehicles on beach $100
Ch. 32, Art II Obstruction of public access $100
Ch. 40, Art. I Motorboats on waterways $50
Ch. 40, Art II Houseboats $100
Ch, 40, Art. III Moorings
First offense $100
Second offense $200
Third and subsequent offenses $300
Ch. 43 Body-piercing $100
Ch. 47 Building procedures $100
Ch. 51 Numbering of buildings $50
Ch. 54 Building and Premises Maintenance $100
Ch. 57 Sale of cigarettes from machines $100
Ch. 59 Comprehensive occupancy $100
Ch. 80 Fire lanes $100
Ch. 89 Gambling $200
Ch. 93 Garage sales $25
Ch. 100, Art. I Distribution of advertising $50
Ch. 100, Art. II Commercial handbills $100
Ch. 104 Handicapped parking $100
§ 1-3 BARNSTABLE CODE § 1-3
1:4
Code Chapter/
Section Subject Fine
Ch. 108 Toxic and hazardous materials $200
Ch. 112, Art. I Historic properties $100
Ch. 121, § 121-7 Town Manager regulations $100
Ch. 125 Saunter or loitering $50
Ch. 128 Operation of motorized conveyance
on ways or places to which public
has right of access
$50
Ch. 133 Anti-noise regulation $150
Ch. 141, Art. I Use of land on Main Street $50
Ch. 147, Art. II Camping on public or private
property
$100
Ch. 147, Art. III Protection of privacy $50
Ch. 150 Hawker or peddler $100
Ch. 166 Raffles and bazaars $100
Ch. 170 Rental registration
Any violation $100
Two documented violations by
owner in a 12-month period
$300
Ch. 173 Roller-skating and skateboarding $50
Ch. 177, Art. I Vehicle within a closed area (Sandy
Neck Beach Park)
$150
Ch. 177, Art. I Vehicle without a valid permit
(Sandy Neck Beach Park)
$150
Ch. 180 Scenic roads $50
Ch. 184, Art. I Sewer use $100
Ch. 192, Art. I Advertising devices and billboards $100
Ch. 192, Art. II Signs $100
Ch. 195 Single-use plastic carry-out bags
First offense Warning
Second offense $100
Third offense $200
Ch. 198 Removal of soil; sand pits $50
Ch. 206, Art. II Snow, ice and vehicle removal $50
Ch. 205, Art. I Synthetic marijuana and synthetic
marijuana analogue
$300
Ch. 210 Swimming pools $20
Ch. 221 Town trees $100
§ 1-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-3
1:5
Code Chapter/
Section Subject Fine
Ch. 228 Unregistered motor vehicles $200
Ch. 232 Wastewater discharge $250
Ch. 237 Wetlands protection $100
Ch. 240 Zoning $100
§ 1-4. Fines for violations of Health regulations. [Amended
12-4-2008 by Order No. 2009-044]
Offense Fine
Violation of Board of Health regulations $100
Violation of 105 CMR 410, State Sanitary Code, Chapter
2, Minimum Standards for Fitness for Human Habitation
$100
§ 1-5. Fines for violations of Town Manager's regulations.
Offense Fine
Herring Regulations
Taking herring or alewives on a closed day $50
Failure to remove fish caught $50
Obstructing passage of herring or alewives $100
Offense Fine
Shellfishing Rules and Regulations
Shellfishing without a valid permit $50
Taking of shellfish during a closed season $50
Taking of shellfish on a closed day $75
Removing shell from shellfish before coming ashore $75
Taking shellfish in excess of family weekly limit or the
amount allowed on a family special permit
$75
Taking scallops in excess of family weekly limit $75
Taking scallops in other than designated area $75
Taking sea worms on Saturday $15
Taking sea worms in excess of 100 per family per week. $15
Selling shellfish, sea worms or eels with a family permit $75
Failure to visibly display permit while shellfishing $15
Transfer of family permit $15
Shellfishing under 12 years old without licensed adult $15
Shellfishing in closed area and/or damaging public and/
or private culturing gear in a closed area
$100
§ 1-3 BARNSTABLE CODE § 1-5
1:6
Offense Fine
Shellfishing Rules and Regulations
Taking shellfish in excess of commercial daily limit $300
More than two commercial permits per boat $75
Possession of more than 5% seed per batch of shellfish $300
Taking scallops without a well-defined annual growth
ring
$25
Using other than tools permitted for shellfishing $75
Use of scallop dredge in excess of 32 inches width $75
Dredging scallops in air temperature below 28° F. $15
Diving for shellfish without displaying proper flag $75
Taking of shellfish from any shellfish grant $100
Shellfishing during nighttime hours as defined $300
Offense Fine
Dog Regulations
Violations of dog regulations $50
§ 1-6. Fines for violations of Conservation Commission regulations.
[Amended 2-3-2011 by Order No. 2011-045]
Offense Fine
Wetlands Violations (Ch. 237)
Violations within wetlands resource area $200
Violations within 100 feet of a wetlands resource area $200
Failure to comply with an enforcement order issued by
the Barnstable Conservation Commission or its agents
$300
Any unauthorized activity beyond the scope of an order
of conditions, determination of applicability or certificate
of compliance issued by the Conservation Commission
$300
Offense Fine
Land Use Regulations (Ch. 701)
Littering $300
Illicit dumping $300
Unauthorized vehicle use (cars, trucks, ATV, motorcycles, dirtbikes):
First offense $100
Second offense $200
Cutting or removal of vegetation, soil, or stone $200
Consumption of alcoholic beverages $100
§ 1-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-6
1:7
Offense Fine
Land Use Regulations (Ch. 701)
Camping $200
Defacing or destruction of any structure, sign or gate. $200
Offense Fine
Shooting Range (Ch. 702)
Violations of shooting range regulations $150
§ 1-6.1. Fines for violation of Marine and Environmental Affairs
Division Regulations [Added 9-2-2010 by Order No. 2011-003]
Offense Fine
Violation of Sandy Neck Beach regulations $50
§ 1-6 BARNSTABLE CODE § 1-6.1
1:8
ARTICLE II
Schedule of Parking Fines
[Adopted 5-6-2004 by Order No. 2004-077; amended in its entirety
5-5-2016 by Order No. 2016-077]
§ 1-7. Parking fines in effect.
The following Schedule of Parking Fines shall be in effect in the Town of
Barnstable:
Type of Violation Amount of Fine
Handicap $100
Fire lane $100
Fire hydrant $100
Overtime $40
Meter $40
Other parking violations $40
Vehicle with expired inspection
sticker
$50
Vehicle with expired registration
plate or decal
$50
§ 1-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-7
1:9

ARTICLE III
Adoption of Code by Town Council
[Adopted 1-20-2005 by Order No. 2005-038]
§ 1-8. Adoption of Code.
The ordinances of the Town of Barnstable of a general and permanent
nature adopted by the Town Council, as previously consolidated by the Town
of Barnstable, as amended through May 6, 2004, and Schedule A of this
ordinance, and the ordinances of a general and permanent nature adopted
by the Town Council subsequent to that date, all as revised, codified and
consolidated into chapters and sections by General Code Publishers Corp.,
and consisting of Chapters 1 through 239; and the Administrative Code of
the Town of Barnstable adopted by the Town Council as an appendix to but
not an integral part of the general ordinances pursuant to Section 5-1(2)(c)
of the Charter of the Town of Barnstable, as amended through May 6, 2004,
and Schedule A of this ordinance, all as revised, codified and consolidated
into chapters and sections by General Code Publishers Corp., and consisting
of Chapter 241; are hereby approved, adopted, ordained and enacted as
the Code of the Town of Barnstable, hereinafter known and referred to
as the "Code." The terms "ordinance," "ordinances" and "ordinances of a
general and permanent nature" whenever employed herein shall include the
provisions of the Administrative Code for purposes of this recodification,
except that the term "this ordinance" shall refer to this docket number
2005-038.
§ 1-9. Code supersedes prior ordinances.
This ordinance and the Code shall supersede all other general and
permanent ordinances enacted prior to the enactment of this Code, except
such ordinances as are hereinafter expressly saved from repeal or
continued in force.
§ 1-10. When effective.
This ordinance shall take effect immediately upon passage and publication
according to law.
§ 1-11. Inclusion of Ordinance in Code.
This ordinance shall, upon adoption, be included in the Code as Chapter 1,
General Provisions, Article III, Adoption of Code.
§ 1-12. Copy of Code on file.
A copy of the Code in loose-leaf form has been filed in the office of the
Town Clerk and shall remain there for use and examination by the public
until final action is taken on this ordinance; and, if this ordinance shall
be adopted, such copy shall be certified to by the Clerk of the Town of
Barnstable by impressing thereon the Seal of the Town as provided by law,
§ 1-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-12
1:11
and such certified copy shall remain on file in the office of the Clerk of the
Town to be made available to persons desiring to examine the same during
all times while the said Code is in effect.
§ 1-13. Publication; filing.
The Clerk of the Town of Barnstable, pursuant to law, shall cause to be
published, in the manner required, a copy of this adopting ordinance in a
newspaper of general circulation in the Town. Sufficient copies of the Code
shall be maintained in the office of the Clerk for inspection by the public at
all times during regular office hours. The enactment and publication of this
adopting ordinance, coupled with the availability of copies of the Code for
inspection by the public, shall be deemed, held and considered to be due
and legal publication of all provisions of the Code for all purposes.
§ 1-14. Amendments to Code.
Any and all additions, amendments or supplements to the Code, when
passed and adopted in such form as to indicate the intent of the Town
Council to make them a part thereof, shall be deemed to be incorporated
into such Code so that reference to the Code of the Town of Barnstable shall
be understood and intended to include such additions and amendments.
Whenever such additions, amendments or supplements to the Code shall
be adopted, they shall thereafter be printed and, as provided hereunder,
inserted in the loose-leaf book containing the said Code as amendments and
supplements thereto.
§ 1-15. Inclusion of new legislation prior to adoption of Code.
All ordinances of a general and permanent nature adopted subsequent to
the date given in § 1-21A and prior to the effective date of this ordinance
given in § 1-10 are hereby deemed to be part of the Code and shall, upon
being printed, be included therein. Attested copies of all such legislation
shall be temporarily placed in the Code until printed supplements are
included.
§ 1-16. Code book to be kept up-to-date.
It shall be the duty of the Clerk, or someone authorized and directed by her
or him, to keep up-to-date the certified copy of the book containing the Code
required to be filed in her office for the use of the public. All changes in said
Code and all ordinances adopted subsequent to the effective date of this
codification which shall be adopted specifically as part of the Code shall,
when finally adopted, be included therein by reference until such changes
or new ordinances are printed as supplements to said Code book, at which
time such supplements shall be inserted therein.
§ 1-12 BARNSTABLE CODE § 1-17
1:12
§ 1-17. Sale of Code book.
Copies of the Code book containing the Code may be purchased from the
Clerk upon the payment of a fee to be set by Town Council, which may also
arrange for procedures for the periodic supplementation thereof.
§ 1-18. Altering or tampering with Code; penalties for violation.
It shall be unlawful for anyone to improperly change or amend, by additions
or deletions, any part or portion of the Code, or to alter or tamper with such
Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the Town of
Barnstable to be misrepresented thereby. Anyone violating this section of
this ordinance shall be subject, upon conviction, to a fine of not more than
$300.
§ 1-19. Severability.
§ 1-20. Repeal of ordinances.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances of a general and permanent nature,
adopted and in force on the date of the adoption of this ordinance and being
inconsistent with any ordinance contained in the Code, are hereby repealed
as of the effective date of this adopting ordinance, except as hereinafter
provided.
§ 1-21. Ordinances saved from repeal.
The adoption of this Code and the repeal of ordinances provided for in
§ 1-20 of this ordinance shall not affect the following ordinances, rights and
obligations, which are hereby expressly saved from repeal:
Severability of Code provisions. Each section of the Code, and every
part of each section, is an independent section or part of a section, and
the holding of any section or a part thereof to be unconstitutional, void
or ineffective for any cause shall not be deemed to affect the validity or
constitutionality of any other sections or parts thereof.
A.
Severability of ordinance provisions. Each section of this ordinance is
an independent section, and the holding of any section or part thereof
to be unconstitutional, void or ineffective for any cause shall not be
deemed to affect the validity or constitutionality of any other sections
or parts thereof
B.
A. Any ordinance adopted subsequent to May 6, 2004.
Any right or liability established, accrued or incurred under any
legislative provision prior to the effective date of this ordinance, or
any action or proceeding brought for the enforcement of such right or
liability.
B.
§ 1-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-21
1:13
§ 1-22. Changes in previously adopted ordinances.
Any offense or act committed or done before the effective date of
this ordinance in violation of any legislative provision, or any penalty,
punishment or forfeiture which may result therefrom.
C.
Any prosecution, indictment, action, suit or other proceeding pending,
or any judgment rendered, prior to the effective date of this ordinance,
brought pursuant to any legislative provision.
D.
Any franchise, license, right, easement or privilege heretofore granted
or conferred.
E.
Any ordinance providing for the laying out, opening, altering, widening,
relocating, straightening, establishing grade, changing name,
improvement, acceptance or vacation of any right-of-way, easement,
street, road, highway, park or other public place, or any portion thereof.
F.
Any ordinance or resolution appropriating money or transferring funds,
promising or guaranteeing the payment of money or authorizing the
issuance and delivery of any bond or other instruments or evidence of
the Town's indebtedness.
G.
Ordinances authorizing the purchase, sale, lease or transfer of
property, or any lawful contract or obligation.
H.
I. The levy or imposition of taxes, assessments or charges.
The dedication of property or approval of preliminary or final
subdivision plats.
J.
K. Any ordinance providing for salaries or compensation.
L. Any ordinance relating to traffic or parking.
In compiling and preparing the ordinances for adoption and revision as
part of the Code, certain grammatical changes and other minor changes
were made in one or more of said ordinances. It is the intention of the
Town Council that all said changes be adopted as part of the Code as
if the ordinances so changed had been previously formally amended to
read as such.
A.
Nomenclature changes. Throughout the Code, the following
nomenclature changes were made:
(1) Information Systems to Information Technology.
(2) Building Division to Building Services Division.
Health, Safety and Environmental Services Department to
Regulatory Services Department.
(3)
Subsidized Housing Committee and Fair Housing Committee to
Housing Committee.
(4)
B.
§ 1-21 BARNSTABLE CODE § 1-22
1:14
(5) Handicapped Access Board to Disability Commission.
Fees. In the following sections, fees have been deleted therefrom and
moved into Chapter 76, Fees, Article II, Schedule of Fees: §§ 96-3,
130-5, 142-6, and 217-4.
C.
In addition, the following changes, amendments or revisions are made
herewith, to become effective upon the effective date of this ordinance.
(Chapter and section number references in Schedule A attached hereto
are to the ordinances as they have been renumbered and appear in the
Code.)1
D.
1. Editor's Note: In accordance with § 1-22D, the chapters, parts and sections which were
added, amended, adopted or deleted by this ordinance are indicated throughout the Code
by a footnote referring to Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article III. During routine
supplementation, footnotes indicating amendments, additions or deletions will be
replaced with the following history: "Amended (added, deleted) 1-20-2005 by Order No.
2005-038." Schedule A, which contains a complete description of all changes, is on file in
the Town offices.
§ 1-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-22
1:15

ARTICLE IV
Adoption of Codified Zoning
[Adopted 1-20-2005 by Order No. 2005-039]
§ 1-23. Adoption of codified Zoning Ordinance.
The Zoning Ordinance of the Town of Barnstable adopted by Article 4 of
the Warrant for the April 7, 1987, Special Town Meeting, as readopted on
September 27, 1990, as amended through April 15, 2004, is hereby codified
and renumbered into articles and sections as set forth in Chapter 240 of
the Code of the Town of Barnstable, except that Subsection C of § 240-91
be amended by striking out the words "this section" and inserting in place
thereof the words "Subsection B." The codification and renumbering of
Chapter 240 is hereby approved, adopted, ordained and enacted.
§ 1-24. Revisions to Zoning Ordinance.
In § 240-5, the list of districts is amended, under the Commercial Districts
heading, by deleting the BL-C Business Limited C District; by adding the
MB-A2 Marine Business A2 District; by changing the MB-A Marine Business
A District to MB-A1 Marine Business A1 District; and by adding the Medical
Services Overlay District to the list of overlay districts.
§ 1-25. When effective.
This ordinance shall take effect immediately upon passage and publication
according to law.
§ 1-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-25
1:17

ARTICLE V
Adoption of Regulations as Codified
[Adopted 1-20-2005 by Order No. 2005-040]
§ 1-26. Adoption of codified regulations.
The regulations of the various boards, officers and agencies of the Town of
Barnstable as listed below are hereby adopted as codified and renumbered
into chapters, articles and sections in the Code of the Town of Barnstable:
§ 1-27. Revisions to regulations.
A. Part III, Board of Health.
B. Part IV, Town Manager Regulations.
C. Part V. Licensing Authority Regulations.
D. Part VI, Marine and Environmental Affairs Division Regulations.
E. Part VII, Conservation Commission Regulations.
F. Part VIII, Planning Board Regulations.
G. Part IX, Department of Public Works Regulations.
Amendments to Board of Health Regulations:
In Chapter 322, Food Establishments, Article III, Grease
Contamination, § 322-19, the following sentence is deleted: "You
are advised to call Peter Doyle, 862-6335, at the Town Sewer Plant
to schedule this required pumping."
(1)
A.
Amendments to Town Manager Regulations:
In Chapter 403, Dog Control, § 403-2E is amended as follows: The
fee for each dog licensed shall be $10, unless a certificate of a
veterinarian stating that the dog has been spayed or neutered has
been presented to the Town Clerk, in which case the fee shall be
$7. No license fee or part thereof shall be refunded because of
a subsequent death, loss, spaying or neutering, or removal from
the Town of such dog. Any owner or keeper of a dog who moves
into the Town of Barnstable and has a valid dog license for his
or her dog from another city or town in the Commonwealth may
obtain a Town of Barnstable transfer license upon presentation
of license documentation from said city or town and a fee of $3.
A late fee of $5 will be assessed to individuals who license the
animal from August 1 of each year to December 31 of each year.
Any person who licenses the animal from January 1 to June 30 for
the prior year will be assessed a late fee of $10. This does not
apply for newly acquired dogs or for individuals who have moved
into Town less than 30 days prior to licensing. License fees shall
be reviewed annually in accordance with the Town of Barnstable
(1)
B.
§ 1-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-27
1:19
§ 1-28. Ratification of codified regulations.
The regulations codified herein shall be subject to ratification as codified by
the boards, officers and agencies set forth in § 1-26.
ordinances. License fees shall be reviewed annually in accordance
with the Town of Barnstable ordinances. Chapter II, Article XIIIA,
Establishment of Certain User Fees by the Town Council, Town
Manager, and Other Municipal Agencies.
In Chapter 408, Roller Skates and Skateboards, § 408-2 is amended
as follows: No person shall rent roller skates or skateboards to
another person for off-premises use within the Town without first
obtaining a license from the Town Manager. The Town Manager
may annually issue such a license which shall be issued upon
written application and payment of an annual fee of $25. Each such
licensee shall prominently post a notice at their premises listing the
areas of the Town in which roller-skating is prohibited, and shall
cause such a notice to be prominently reproduced in any rental
contract used by the licensee in the course of business.
(2)
Amendments to Conservation Commission Regulations:
In Chapter 702, Shooting Range, § 702-2D is amended as follows:
Individual permits shall be valid for a period of two years,
commencing June 1, 2004. The permit term expires May 31, 2006.
(1)
C.
§ 1-27 BARNSTABLE CODE § 1-28
1:20
Chapter 9
AFFORDABLE HOUSING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Rental property — See Ch. 170.
Zoning— See Ch. 240.
Subdivision Rules and Regulations — See Ch.
801.
§ 1-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-28
1:21

ARTICLE I
Inclusionary Affordable Housing Requirements
[Adopted 6-17-1999; amended 9-23-1999 (Ch. III, Art. LXIII, of the
General Ordinance)]
§ 9-1. Purpose and intent.
The purpose of this article is to define a coherent set of policies and
objectives for the development of affordable housing in compliance with
MGL, Ch. 40B, §§ 2023, the Cape Cod Commission's Regional Policy Plan
for Cape Cod, the Town of Barnstable's Comprehensive Plan and various
initiative programs developed by Federal State, County and Town
government. It is intended that affordable housing units that result from
this article be considered as affordable housing units for the purposes of
MGL Ch. 40B §§ 20 - 23. This article is also intended to assure that an
appropriate share of the remaining undeveloped land in the Town is used
to meet the Town's critical need for affordable housing and to promote the
inclusion of a fair share of the cost of construction of affordable housing in
all residential and nonresidential land development activity in the Town of
Barnstable.
§ 9-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AFFORDABLE HOUSING REVIEW COMMITTEE — The Housing Committee
of the Town of Barnstable acting in an advisory capacity to the Town Council
pursuant to § 9-6.
AFFORDABLE HOUSING UNIT — A dwelling unit that by deed restriction
is and will remain (a) available for sale and sold at a selling price that
will result in an annual shelter cost of not more than 30% of the annual
household income of a qualified affordable housing unit purchaser or (b)
available for rental and rented at an annual rent that will result in an annual
shelter cost of not more than 30% of the annual household income of a
qualified affordable housing unit tenant, not including any unit rented to
a tenant receiving rental assistance under 42 U.S.C. § 1437f or any similar
rental assistance program.
ANNUAL SHELTER COST —
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN — The Comprehensive Plan of the Town of
Barnstable, adopted by the Town Council on October 30, 1997, and
For owners, the aggregate of annual charges for debt service on a
purchase money mortgage, real estate taxes and homeowner's
insurance.
A.
For tenants, the aggregate of annual charges for rent, utilities and
tenant's insurance.
B.
§ 9-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 9-2
1:23
approved by the Cape Cod Commission on February 12, 1998, as amended
from time to time.
DEED RESTRICTION — A provision, acceptable in form and substance to
the Town of Barnstable, in a deed to real property that runs with the land
in perpetuity so as to be binding on and enforceable against any person
claiming an interest in the property. Any restriction created under this
article shall survive any bankruptcy, insolvency or other action, and shall
not be subject to nullification for any reason.
DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENT — An agreement between the Town acting
through the Town Council and an applicant entered into in accordance with
Section 14 of the Cape Cod Commission Act and this article which provides
for the development of affordable housing in the Town and establishes
the permitted uses, densities, location and other characteristics of the
development.
LOCAL HOUSING FUND — An account established and operated for the
purpose of creating or preserving affordable housing by the Town of
Barnstable or the Barnstable Housing Authority, or a housing trust or
community development corporation created under the laws of
Massachusetts. Said funds can specifically be used to purchase and improve
land, to purchase dwelling units or to develop new or rehabilitate existing
dwelling units for purchase or rental by qualified affordable housing unit
purchasers or tenants or to preserve existing affordable housing in the
affordable housing inventory. Expenditures from the Local Housing Fund
will be determined annually by the Town Council through the adoption of a
housing action plan.
PLANNING BOARD — The Town of Barnstable Planning Board.
QUALIFIED AFFORDABLE HOUSING UNIT PURCHASER OR TENANT —
EXEMPT REPLACEMENT HOUSE — Considered to be any of the following
as determined by the Building Commissioner:
An individual or household with total annual income that does not
exceed the following percentages of the median income for the Town of
Barnstable, as determined annually by the United States Department of
Housing and Urban Development:
(1) For the purchaser of a single-family home: 80%.
(2) For the purchaser of a condominium unit: 65%.
(3) For the tenant in a rental unit: 65%.
A.
Income from part-time employment of full-time students enrolled in and
attending a public school or accredited educational institution shall not
be considered part of a household's total annual income.
B.
A single-family house damaged or destroyed by causes not under the
owner's control regardless of the length of ownership, provided the
replacement house is not more than 20% larger in volume.
A.
§ 9-2 BARNSTABLE CODE § 9-2
1:24
§ 9-3. Applicability.
§ 9-4. Inclusionary affordable housing requirements.
Any land division/development activity granted in accordance with § 9-3
shall be subject to the following requirements:
A single-family home that has been owned for the last three years by
the current owner or immediate family, and is being replaced for this
owner's use.
B.
A single-family home where the portion saved and to be reused in the
new design and construction represents at least 20% of the value of the
existing structure. [Amended 2-17-2000]
C.
This article shall apply to any division of land into two or more lots for
residential use which requires action of the Planning Board under MGL
Ch. 41, §§ 81K through 81GG or otherwise, whether or not subdivision
approval is required.
A.
This article shall apply to the construction of single-family, multifamily
and/or condominium residential units on any lot or lots under common
ownership with a construction value of greater than $100,000 per unit.
The construction of affordable housing units, as defined in § 9-2 above,
are specifically exempt, as are exempt replacement houses as defined
under § 9-2 above.
B.
This article shall apply to any combination of land division and
development activity stated in Subsections A and B above, except for
the land development activities of a limited profit corporation, not-forprofit
or Town agency engaged in providing affordable housing under
MGL Ch. 40B, or any charitable, not-for-profit, tax exempt corporation
or entity.
C.
This article shall apply to the construction of any nonresidential
development or addition, or the nonresidential area of a mixed use
development. It shall not apply to interior renovation, or reconstruction
or replacement activities.
D.
In a development described in § 9-3A consisting of less than 10 acres,
the applicant shall pay an inclusionary housing fee of $500 per lot
created. Such payments shall be made to the Local Housing Fund
established under this article upon endorsement or approval by the
Planning Board.
A.
In a development described in § 9-3A consisting of 10 or more acres
at least 10% of the lots created shall be dedicated by deed restriction
to affordable housing units, and the applicant and any successor in
interest shall comply with Subsection E below. Any fraction of a whole
lot resulting from this calculation shall require the payment of an
inclusionary housing fee based on 10% of the average value of all lots
created by the development less the value of any dedicated lots.
B.
§ 9-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 9-4
1:25
In a development described in § 9-3B, consisting of less than 10 housing
units the applicant shall pay an inclusionary housing fee based on $10
per $1,000 of the building permit value of the units created. Such
payments shall be made to the Local Housing Fund established under
this article at the time of issuance of the building permit.
C.
In a development described in § 9-3B, consisting of 10 of more units,
at least 10% of the residential units constructed shall be dedicated by
deed restriction to affordable housing units, and the applicant and any
successor in interest shall comply with Subsection F below. Any fraction
of a whole unit resulting from this calculation shall require the payment
of an inclusionary housing fee based on 10% of the average value of all
units created by the development less the value of any dedicated units.
D.
Inclusionary housing fee.
In a development described in § 9-3D, the applicant shall contribute
at the time of issuance of a building permit an inclusionary housing
fee as follows:
All development of 5,000 square feet or less: $0.10 per square
foot.
(a)
All development of greater than 5,000 square feet: $0.20 per
square foot.
(b)
(1)
Such payments as set forth above shall be made at the time of
issuance of the building permit to the Local Housing Fund
established under this article. Such funds may be utilized for the
continued development of appropriate methods and approaches to
analyze the impacts of nonresidential development on the nature
and quantity of affordable housing within the Town of Barnstable
and the possible methods to mitigate and/or address same
(2)
E.
When house lots and/or units are provided under Subsections B or D
above, the applicant shall, subject to such deed restrictions and other
requirements as the Town shall require in order to assure compliance
with MGL Ch. 40B, § 20 to 23, either by:
Conveyance of such lots to a government agency or nonprofit
organization approved by the Town for the construction of
affordable housing units for the sale and/or lease to qualified
affordable housing unit purchasers or tenants.
(1)
Conveyance of constructed affordable housing units to a
government agency or nonprofit organization approved by the
Town who shall offer said unit for sale and/or lease to qualified
affordable housing unit purchasers or tenants. The proceeds of any
such sale and/or lease shall be delivered to the applicant within 30
days of payment.
(2)
F.
G. Appeals.
§ 9-4 BARNSTABLE CODE § 9-4
1:26
§ 9-5. Provisions applicable to all affordable housing units/lots.
All inclusionary affordable housing units and/or lots created under this
article shall meet the following minimum requirements:
An applicant who is dissatisfied for the following reasons with the
fee determination made by the Planning Board under Subsection A
or the Building Commissioner under Subsection C may appeal said
determination as follows:
(1)
Within 10 days after paying the fee, the applicant shall appeal
in writing to the Town Manager, based upon one of the following
specific criteria:
A mistake or error in the calculation in the land or building
value;
(a)
Special circumstances relating to the physical or
environmental conditions of the site that result in an excessive
fee for this particular proposal;
(b)
The application of this article makes the development of any
lot or parcel of land uneconomic or without reasonable
alternative.
(c)
(2)
The Town Manager shall forthwith designate a hearing officer who
shall hold a hearing and make a written determination within 21
days of the filing of the appeal. If the hearing officer determines
that the fee is excessive, a rebate shall be made forthwith. Work on
the project may proceed notwithstanding the filing of the appeal.
(3)
Affordable housing units and/or lots within market rate developments
shall be integrated with the rest of the development and shall be
compatible in design, appearance, construction and quality of materials
with the other units and/or lots. Interior features of affordable units
shall comply in all respects with the minimum design and construction
standards set forth in the Local Initiative Guidelines, by the Division of
Housing and Community Development, July 1996, or as amended.
A.
Affordable housing units and/or lots shall be provided coincident with
the development of the market rate units and/or lots, but in no event
shall the development of the affordable units and/or lots be delayed
beyond the schedule below:
Market Rate Unit/Lot % Affordable Unit/Lot %
Up to 30% None required
30% + 1 unit At least 10%
Up to 50% At least 30%
Up to 75% At least 50%
75% + 1 unit At least 70%
B.
§ 9-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 9-5
1:27
§ 9-6. Development agreement.
Market Rate Unit/Lot % Affordable Unit/Lot %
Up to 90% 100%
In lieu of applying the specific provisions of this article, a person
seeking to undertake a development described in § 9-3 may apply to the
Town to enter into a development agreement pursuant to the Town's
Development Agreement Ordinance. The Barnstable Housing
Committee shall act as a reviewing body for any development
agreement proposed under this section and shall advise the Town
Council if such development agreement provides benefits to the Town
that are at least as beneficial to the Town as the affordable housing
benefits provided for in this article. In deliberating possible
development agreement provisions, the Town shall take into
consideration any combination of the following:
Conveyance to the Town or the Town's designee of land that the
Town determines to be suitable for the construction of at least as
many dwelling units as are required by § 9-4.
(1)
The construction of required dwelling units at locations in the Town
of Barnstable other than the location that is the subject of the
application.
(2)
Payment into the Local Housing Fund in lieu of dedication or
construction of each whole residential lot or residential unit
required by § 9-4B or D.
(3)
Any dwelling units built or lots conveyed pursuant to this section
shall be of a design and quality and in locations found by the
Town to be consistent with the Comprehensive Plan, including the
requirement that affordable housing be distributed throughout the
Town.
(4)
The need for any other requirements or restrictions in a
development agreement that are necessary or appropriate to
assure that the purposes of this article are carried out. Such
requirements may include, but are not limited to, design standards,
regulatory agreements, monitoring and reporting requirements,
unrestricted access to the applicant's financial records, periodic
audits and penalties for noncompliance
(5)
A.
Development agreement applicants are encouraged to provide at least
70% of any dwelling units or house lots to be provided under a
development agreement for persons or families living or working in the
Town or having a substantial historical and current connection with the
Town by reason of prior residence or attendance at Town schools and
current residence of close relatives in the Town.
B.
§ 9-5 BARNSTABLE CODE § 9-7
1:28
§ 9-7. Establishment of maximum cost; income certification of
potential purchasers.
§ 9-8. Preservation of affordability; restrictions on resale.
Each affordable unit created under this article shall have restrictions
governing its resale or reoccupancy to preserve the long-term affordability,
to preserve its continued availability as affordable housing in perpetuity,
including the following:
§ 9-9. Creation of ad hoc Inclusionary Housing Study Committee.
In order to review and analyze the application of a nonresidential
inclusionary housing linkage fee, there is hereby created an ad hoc
Inclusionary Housing Committee (IHC), as follows:.
The maximum housing cost for affordable units created under this
article is as established by Massachusetts Division of Housing and
Community Development, Local Initiative Program.
A.
Potential purchasers of affordable units created under this article are
required to submit copies of the last three years federal and state
income tax returns, and to certify, in writing prior to occupancy of the
unit that his/her or their family's income does not exceed the maximum.
B.
A marketing plan or other method of advertisement for availability of
the affordable unit(s) and selection of buyer or tenant of the affordable
unit(s) to be created under this article shall be provided to the Town.
A.
Resale price. subsequent resale of an affordable unit shall be made
to a qualified affordable housing purchaser and shall be based on the
initial discount rate applied to the sales price of the unit, which shall
be recorded at the time of initial sale, which shall be applied to any
subsequent resale of the unit.
B.
Right of first refusal to purchase. The purchaser of an affordable unit
shall execute a deed rider in a form provided by the Department of
Housing and Community Development, granting the Town of Barnstable
the right of first refusal to purchase the property in the event that a
subsequent qualified purchaser can not be found.
C.
The IHC shall be composed of one representative from the Barnstable
Housing Committee, Barnstable Housing Authority, Barnstable
Economic Development Commission, Hyannis Area Chamber of
Commerce, Barnstable Town Manager and two representatives from
the Barnstable Town Council.
A.
The IHC shall report back to the Town Council on the application of this
article to nonresidential development no later than September 9, 1999.
B.
§ 9-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 9-10
1:29
§ 9-10. Effective dates.
This article shall take effect on the following dates:
§ 9-11. Conflict with other bylaws and ordinances; severability.
For residential construction projects: building permits issued on or
after August 2, 1999.
A.
For approval not required (ANR) plans: endorsement on or after August
2, 1999.
B.
For subdivisions (definitive plan approval): definitive plan approval on
or after September 6, 1999.
C.
For open space residential development projects: development plans
approved on or after October 4, 1999.
D.
For nonresidential construction projects: building permits issued on or
after November 1, 1999.
E.
To the extent that a conflict of interest exists between this article
and other ordinances of the Town of Barnstable, the more restrictive
provisions shall apply.
A.
If any provision of this article is held invalid by a court of competent
jurisdiction, the remainder of the article shall not be affected thereby.
The invalidity of any section or sections or parts of any section or
sections of this article shall not affect the validity of the remaining
sections or parts of sections or the other ordinances of the Town of
Barnstable.
B.
§ 9-10 BARNSTABLE CODE § 9-11
1:30
ARTICLE II
Accessory Apartments and Apartment Units
[Adopted 11-16-2000; amended 10-3-2002]
§ 9-12. Intent and purpose.
The intent of this article is to provide an opportunity to bring into
compliance many of the currently unpermitted accessory apartments
and apartment units in the Town of Barnstable, as well as to allow the
construction of new dwelling units accessory to existing single-family
homes to create additional affordable housing.
A.
This article recognizes that although unpermitted and unlawfully
occupied, these dwelling units are filling a market demand for housing
at rental costs typically below that of units which are and have been
lawfully constructed and occupied.
B.
It is in the public interest and in concert with its obligations under state
law, for the Town of Barnstable to offer a means by which so-called
unpermitted and illegal dwelling units can achieve lawful status, but
only in the manner described below.
C.
It is the position of the Town of Barnstable that the most appropriate
mechanism for allowing for the conversion of unlawful dwelling units
to lawful units is found in MGL c. 40B, §§ 20 to 23, the so-called
"Comprehensive Permit" program. This provision of state law
encourages the development of low- and moderate-income rental and
owner-occupied housing and provides a means for the Board of Appeals
to remove local barriers to the creation of affordable housing units.
These barriers include any local regulation such as zoning and general
ordinances that may be an impediment to affordable housing
development.
D.
The Local Comprehensive Plan states that the Town should commit
appropriate resources to support affordable housing initiatives. Under
this article, the Town commits the following resources to support this
affordable housing initiative:
Waiver of fees for the inspection and monitoring of the properties
identified under this article;
(1)
Designation of Town staff to assist the property owner in navigating
through the process established under this article;
(2)
To the extent allowable by law, the negative effect entailed by
the deed restriction involved will be reflected in the property tax
assessment; and
(3)
To assist property owners in locating available municipal, state
and federal funds for rehabilitating and upgrading the properties
identified under this article.
(4)
E.
§ 9-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 9-12
1:31
§ 9-13. Creation of local Chapter 40B program.
As part of the Town's efforts to create the type of affordable housing that
best meets the needs of the Town and its residents, the Town Manager and
staff designated by the Town Manager shall establish a screening process
and criteria for the preexisting and unpermitted units described herein, as
well as for the construction of new units accessory to single-family homes,
as part of a local Chapter 40B program which program will provide the state
or federal subsidy necessary to establish standing under Chapter 40B for
units being created and/or permitted.
§ 9-14. Amnesty program.
Recognizing that the success of this article depends, in part, on the
admission by real property owners that their property may be in violation
of the Zoning Ordinances of the Town,2 the Town hereby establishes the
following amnesty program:
The Local Comprehensive Plan supports, in conjunction with a variety
of other strategies, the conversion of existing structures for use as
affordable housing.
F.
Through the creation of a local Chapter 40B program, which uses state
and federal subsidies, the Town can create a mechanism to utilize
existing structures and to construct new accessory structures for the
creation of affordable housing units that is consistent with the Town's
identified housing needs.
G.
The threshold criteria for units being considered as units potentially
eligible for the amnesty program are:
Real property containing a dwelling unit or dwelling units for which
there does not exist a validly issued variance, special permit or
building permit, does not qualify as a lawful, nonconforming use or
structure, for any or all the units, and that was in existence on a lot
of record within the Town as of January 1, 2000; or
(1)
Real property containing a dwelling unit or dwelling units which
were in existence as of January 1, 2000, and which have been cited
by the Building Department as being in violation of the Zoning
Ordinance; and
(2)
The property owner has the burden of demonstrating to the
Building Commissioner that the criteria in either Subsection A(1)
and/or (2) have been satisfied.
(3)
If any dwelling unit or units identified herein are occupied during
the period of time when amnesty is in effect, said unit must be
inspected by the entity designated by the Town Manager and found
(4)
A.
2. Editor's Note: See Ch. 240, Zoning.
§ 9-12 BARNSTABLE CODE § 9-14
1:32
to be in conformance with the State Building Code and State
Sanitary Code.
The procedure for qualifying units that meet the threshold criteria for
the amnesty program is as follows:
The unit or units must either be a single unit accessory to an
owner occupied single-family dwelling or one or more units in a
multifamily dwelling where there exists a legal multifamily use but
one or more units are currently unpermitted;
(1)
The unit(s) must receive a site approval letter under the Town's
local Chapter 40B program;
(2)
The property owner must agree that if s/he receives a
comprehensive permit, the unit or units for which amnesty is
sought will be rented to a person or family whose income is 80%
or less of the area median income (AMI) of Barnstable-Yarmouth
Metropolitan Statistical Area (MSA) and shall further agree that
rent (including utilities) shall not exceed the rents established by
the Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) for a
household whose income is 80% or less of the median income of
Barnstable-Yarmouth Metropolitan Statistical Area. In the event
that utilities are separately metered, the utility allowance
established by the Barnstable Housing Authority shall be deducted
from HUD's rent level.
(3)
The property owner must agree, that if s/he receives a
comprehensive permit, that s/he will execute a deed restriction
for the unit or units for which amnesty is sought, prepared by
the Town of Barnstable, which runs with the property so as to be
binding on and enforceable against any person claiming an interest
in the property and which restricts the use of one or more units
as rental units to a person or family whose income is 80% or
less of the median income of Barnstable-Yarmouth Metropolitan
Statistical Area (MSA).
(4)
Upon receiving the site approval letter under Subsection B(2)
above, the property owner shall within three months file an
application for a comprehensive permit under the local Chapter
40B program with the Barnstable Zoning Board of Appeals.
(5)
B.
The procedure for obtaining amnesty is as follows:
No zoning enforcement shall be undertaken against any property
owner who demonstrates that s/he meets the threshold criteria
under Subsection A and further demonstrates that s/he is
proceeding in good faith to comply with the procedures under
Subsection B to obtain a comprehensive permit.
(1)
Any protection from zoning enforcement under this article shall
terminate when: (a) A written determination is issued under the
(2)
C.
§ 9-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 9-14
1:33
§ 9-15. New units accessory to single-family owner-occupied
dwellings.
For a proposed new unit to be eligible for consideration under the local
chapter 40B program, it must be a single unit, accessory to an owneroccupied
single-family dwelling, to be located within or attached to an
existing residential structure or within an existing building located on the
same lot as said residential structure and comply with the following:
local Chapter 40B program that the criteria under Subsection B
and the local Chapter 40B program cannot be satisfied; or (b) it
is determined that the property owner is not proceeding diligently
with his/her Chapter 40B application; or (c) the property owner's
Chapter 40B application is denied. A person is deemed "not to be
proceeding diligently" if s/he does not receive a comprehensive
permit within 12 months from the date of issuance of the site
approval letter under the local Chapter 40B program.
This amnesty program shall be reviewed by the Town Council no
later than October 1, 2003.
(3)
The unit(s) must receive a site approval letter under the Town's local
Chapter 40B program;
A.
The property owner must agree that if s/he receives a comprehensive
permit, the accessory dwelling unit will be rented to a person or family
whose income is 80% or less of the area median income (AMI) of
Barnstable-Yarmouth Metropolitan Statistical Area (MSA) and shall
further agrees that rent (including utilities) shall not exceed the rents
established by the Department of Housing and Urban Development
(HUD) for a household whose income is 80% or less of the median
income of Barnstable-Yarmouth Metropolitan Statistical Area. In the
event that utilities are separately metered, the utility allowance
established by the Barnstable Housing Authority shall be deducted from
HUD's rent level.
B.
The property owner must agree, that if s/he receives a comprehensive
permit, that s/he will execute a deed restriction for the unit, prepared
by the Town of Barnstable, which runs with the property so as to be
binding on and enforceable against any person claiming an interest in
the property and which restricts the use of the one unit as a rental unit
to a person or family whose income is 80% or less of the median income
of Barnstable-Yarmouth Metropolitan Statistical Area (MSA).
C.
Upon receiving the site approval under Subsection A above, the
property owner shall file an application for a comprehensive permit
under the local Chapter 40B program with the Barnstable Zoning Board
of Appeals.
D.
§ 9-14 BARNSTABLE CODE § 9-16
1:34
§ 9-16. Quarterly reporting.
The Town Manager shall report to the Town Council no less than quarterly
as to the use of this article, paying particular regard to the level of
participation.
§ 9-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 9-16
1:35
Chapter 13
AIRPORT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Zoning — See Ch. 240.
§ 13-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and cited as the "Airport Approach Protection
Ordinance of the Barnstable Municipal Airport."
§ 13-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, unless the context otherwise requires:
AIRPORT — The Barnstable Municipal Airport.
AIRPORT APPROACH ZONE — Any airspace above the areas defined and
shown on a map entitled Map of Approach Zones, Barnstable Municipal
Airport, Hyannis, Massachusetts, dated February 1, 1957.
AIRPORT HAZARD — Any structure or tree which extends to any airport
approach zone.
ADMINISTRATIVE AGENCY — The Town Manager of the Town of
Barnstable which is hereby designated as the agency charged with
administering the regulations herein prescribed.
PERSON — Any individual, firm, partnership, corporation, company,
association, joint-stock association, and includes any trustee, receiver,
assignee or other similar representation thereof.
STRUCTURE — Any object or structure installed by man, including any
object regulated or licensed under any provision of law.
TREE — A tree or other object of natural growth.
§ 13-3. Findings and intent.
It is hereby declared that the existence of any airport hazard endangers
occupants of the land in its vicinity, and effects a reduction of the area
available for the landing, taking off and maneuvering of aircraft, thus
tending to impair the utility of the airport and the public investment therein.
Accordingly, it is necessary in the interests of public health, safety and
general welfare that the creating, establishment or maintenance of airport
hazards be prevented by exercise of police power, without compensation to
any person, except as herein specifically provided.
§ 9-16 BARNSTABLE CODE § 13-4
13:36
§ 13-4. Structure and tree height restrictions.
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, no structure may be erected
or altered or any tree permitted to grow or be maintained to a height which
would exceed the elevation of the end of the runway by a vertical distance
hereby established as shown and indicated on the map referred to in § 13-2.
§ 13-5. Nonconforming structures and trees.
The limitation prescribed in this chapter shall not be construed to require
the removal, lowering or other change or alteration of any structure or
tree not conforming to these regulations as of the effective date thereof
or otherwise interfere with the continuance of any such nonconforming
use. Nothing herein contained shall be construed to permit any such
nonconforming structure or tree to be substantially altered or repaired,
rebuilt, allowed to grow or replanted so as to become a greater hazard to
air navigation than it was on the effective date of this chapter.
§ 13-6. Administrative agency.
The Town Manager of the Town of Barnstable is hereby designated as the
administrative agency charged with the duty of administering and enforcing
the regulations herein prescribed. The duties of such agency shall include
that of hearing and deciding all permits under § 13-7.
§ 13-7. Variances.
Any person desiring to erect or increase the height of any structure, or to
permit the growth of any tree, in a manner not conforming to the airport
approach protection regulations as herein established, or to establish the
right to do so may apply to the Town Manager for a variance from the
regulations applicable to his property. Such variance may be allowed where
a literal application or enforcement of such regulation would result in
practical difficulty or unnecessary hardship and the relief granted would
not be contrary to public interest. Any permit or variance granted under
this section shall be conditioned as to require the owner of the structure
or tree to permit the Barnstable Municipal Airport at its own expense to
install, operate and maintain suitable obstruction markings or obstruction
lights thereon.
§ 13-8. When effective.
This chapter shall have full force and effect from and after the date of its
adoption and approved as required by the General Laws.
§ 13-4 AIRPORT § 13-8
13:37
Chapter 17
ALARM SYSTEMS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Noncriminal disposition — See Ch. 1, Art. I.
§ 17-1. Purpose.
Advances in technology have engendered the creation and deployment of
sophisticated systems using a variety of protocols to monitor premises and
persons and activities on them, and to generate signals of various types to
which the Police Department is expected to respond. When these systems
work properly in a coordinated system, they can be a significant aid to
safe and efficient law enforcement. When they do not work properly, they
can be dangerous, wasteful and a public nuisance. This chapter is designed
to facilitate the proper use and prevent the improper use of such systems
which presume the response of the Barnstable Police Department. It is also
designed to implement a regulatory framework which is able to keep pace
with rapid changes in the technology involved.
§ 17-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ALARM SYSTEM —
§ 17-3. Standards; regulations.
The Chief of Police is hereby authorized to adopt regulations, subject to the
approval of the Town Manager, to govern the use of alarm systems within
the town. Such regulations shall be based upon considerations of safety,
reliability, control, accountability, efficiency and the avoidance of waste and
Any system which:
(1) Transmits a signal to the Barnstable Police Department; or
Transmits a signal to a third party who relays information to the
Barnstable Police Department; or
(2)
Produces an audible or visible signal to which the Barnstable police
are expected to respond.
(3)
The term "alarm system" shall include, but not be limited to,
systems which generate signals to or from vehicles to telephone,
satellite or cellular communications and geographic positioning
systems and forwarded to the Town of Barnstable Police
Department.
(4)
A.
§ 13-8 BARNSTABLE CODE § 17-3
17:38
unnecessary noise and other public nuisance. Such regulations shall be
maintained on file with the Town Clerk comport with the requirements of
the town, if any, with respect to their publication and codification. Unless
some other date is specified therein or by law, such regulations shall take
effect upon filing with the Town Clerk.
§ 17-4. Prohibitions.
§ 17-5. Permits.
The Chief of Police is hereby authorized to issue permits, to be valid for
terms of one year unless otherwise provided by regulation, for:
§ 17-6. Violations and penalties.
No person may install or maintain, or allow to be installed or
maintained, an alarm system on premises owned or controlled by them
in the town, without a current permit for such system issued by the
Chief of Police.
A.
No person may engage in the business of installing or maintaining or
interfacing with alarm systems in the Town of Barnstable without a
current permit to engage in such a business issued by the Chief of
Police.
B.
No person shall install, maintain, or allow to be installed or maintained
on premises owned or controlled by them any alarm system which does
not comply with the Town's regulations regarding such systems, or to
do anything in violation of such regulations.
C.
Engaging in the business of installing, maintaining or interfacing with
alarm systems within the Town; or
A.
Installing or maintaining an alarm system on premises owned or
controlled by them within the Town.
B.
Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be punished by
a fine of not more than $300 per offense. Each day that a violation is
allowed to continue shall constitute a separate offense.
A.
Violations of this chapter may be enforced by the method of noncriminal
disposition provided for in Chapter 1.
B.
In addition to the penalties provided herein, the Town may recover
the cost of police response to false alarms in the amount of $300 per
officer per response under the provisions of Section 31 of Chapter 40
of the General Laws from either the owner or person in control of the
premises originating the false alarm or of the company operating the
system generating the false alarm, or both.
C.
§ 17-3 ALARM SYSTEMS § 17-7
17:39
§ 17-7. Limitation of liability.
Nothing herein shall be construed by any person to be an assurance of
safety or assistance upon which reliance is warranted within the meaning
of Section 10 of Chapter 258 of the General Laws.
Chapter 20
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Noncriminal disposition — See Ch. . Alcoholic beverages — See Ch. 501.
§ 17-7 BARNSTABLE CODE § 17-7
20:40
ARTICLE I
Open Containers
[Adopted Fall 1984 ATM; approved 2-28-1985 (Art. XVI of Ch. III of
the General Ordinances as updated through 7-7-2003)]
§ 20-1. Possession restricted.
No persons shall drink any alcoholic beverage as defined in § 1 of Chapter
138 of the General Laws or possess an open container of the same, whether
full or partly full, while on, in or upon any public way or way or other place
to which the public has a right of access as invitees or licensees, without
the consent of the owner or person in control thereof.
§ 20-2. Violations and penalties.
Whoever violates the provisions of this article shall be fined not more than
$300.
§ 20-1 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES § 20-2
20:41

ARTICLE II
Possession by Minors
[Adopted 5-4-1985; approved 7-19-1985 (Art. XV of Ch. III of the
General Ordinances as updated through 7-7-2003)]
§ 20-3. Possession and transport restricted.
No person who may not legally purchase alcoholic beverages under Chapter
138 of the General Laws and who is unaccompanied by his or her parent
or guardian shall knowingly transport, carry or have the same in his or her
possession while on, in or upon any public way or way or other place to
which the public has a right of access as invitees or licensees, without the
consent of the owner or person in control thereof.
§ 20-4. Exception.
This article shall not apply to any person legally carrying or transporting
alcoholic beverages in the course of his or her employment.
§ 20-5. Violations and penalties.
Whoever violates the provisions of this article shall be fined not more than
$300.
§ 20-3 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES § 20-5
20:43
Chapter 24
ANIMALS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Noncriminal disposition, Town Manager
regulations — See Ch. I, Art. I.
Stables — See Ch. 376.
Waterfowl — See Ch. 393.
Dog control — See Ch. 403.
§ 20-5 BARNSTABLE CODE § 20-5
20:44
ARTICLE I
Regulation of Dogs
[Adopted 5-7-1992 (Art. XLVI-A of Ch. III of the General Ordinances
as updated through 7-7-2003)]
§ 24-1. Statutory authority.
Pursuant to Section 6 of Article 89 of the amendments to the Constitution
of the Commonwealth and § 147A of Chapter 140 of the General Laws, a
local system for the licensing, regulation, control and disposition of dogs is
hereby authorized.
§ 24-2. Adoption of regulations by Town Manager.3
The Town Manager shall adopt reasonable regulations relating to the
keeping of dogs within the Town. Such regulations may include reasonable
fees for licensing dogs, which fees shall be calculated so as not to exceed
the cost of regulating dogs within the Town. No such regulation shall be
inconsistent with the provisions of Chapter 140 of the General Laws relating
to (a) the turning over or sale of animals to any business or institution
licensed or registered as a research facility or animal dealer, as provided in
§ 151; (b) the minimum confinement period of dogs as provided in § 151A;
(c) the methods of execution, as provided in said § 151A; any ordinance of
the Town relating to the control or regulation of dogs or other animals.
§ 24-3. Disposition of money from licenses and fines.
All money received from licenses or recovered from the fines hereunder
shall be paid into the Town treasury and shall not be turned over to the
county.
3. Editor's Note: See Ch. 403, Dog Control, in Part IV, Town Manager Regulations, of the
Code of the Town of Barnstable.
§ 24-1 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES § 24-3
20:45

ARTICLE II
Regulation of Roosters
[Adopted 5-5-2011 by Order No. 2011-097]
§ 24-4. Restrictions and enforcement.
Not more than one rooster shall at any time be kept on premises not
in agricultural use in the Town of Barnstable except as prohibited under
Subsection C. Any person keeping a rooster on premises not in agricultural
use shall comply with the following. For purposes of this article, premises
shall be deemed to be in agricultural use if the parcel contains five or more
acres primarily and directly used in the course of business, individually or
in any combination, of farming in all its branches, cultivation and tillage
of soil, dairying, the production, cultivation, growing and harvesting of any
agricultural, aquacultural, floricultural or horticultural commodities, the
growing and harvesting of forest products on forest land, the raising of
livestock, including horses, the keeping of horses, the keeping and raising
of poultry, swine, cattle and other domesticated animals used for food
purposes, bees, and fur-bearing animals; or if the parcel contains between
two and five acres, any of the aforesaid activities generates at least a $1,000
per acre based on documented gross sales dollars, regardless of the primary
purpose.
The rooster shall be kept between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.
within a fully enclosed structure designed to minimize noise.
A.
The person shall not allow or permit such rooster at any time to annoy
another person's reasonable right to peace or privacy by making loud or
continuous noise where such noise is plainly audible between the hours
of 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. at a distance of 150 feet from the premises
where the rooster is kept, or between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 7:00
a.m. at a distance of 50 feet from the premises where the rooster is
kept, or when such noise is continuous in excess of 10 minutes.
B.
The provisions of this article may be enforced pursuant to MGL c. 40,
§ 21D, and Article I, Noncriminal Enforcement of Violations, of Chapter
1, General Provisions, of the Code of the Town of Barnstable for the first
three violations; and by prohibiting the further keeping of roosters in
lieu of or in addition to enforcement pursuant to MGL c. 40, § 21, for
each violation thereafter.
C.
§ 24-4 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES § 24-4
20:47
Chapter 32
BEACHES AND WATERWAYS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Noncriminal disposition — See Ch. 1, Art. I.
Boats — See Ch. 40.
Sandy Neck— See Chs. 177 and 601.
Marinas — See Ch. 405.
Mooring — See Ch. 406.
§ 24-4 BARNSTABLE CODE § 24-4
32:48
ARTICLE I
Operation of Motor Vehicles
[Adopted 5-15-1978; approved 8-30-1978 (Art. XXXII of Ch. III of
the General Ordinances as updated through 7-7-2003)]
§ 32-1. Operation restricted.
§ 32-2. Exception for personnel acting in official capacity.
This article shall not apply to district, Town, county, state or federal vehicles
operated by authorized personnel acting in an official capacity or others
under contract to any of the foregoing while acting in an official capacity
under said contract.
§ 32-3. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating the provisions of this article shall be punished by a fine
of not more that $200 for each offense.
No person shall operate a motor vehicle on any salt or fresh water
beach or dunes owned by the Town of Barnstable except as expressly
allowed under Chapter 177, Sandy Neck, Article I, of the Code of the
Town of Barnstable.
A.
No person shall fuel, launch, retrieve or otherwise operate from the
Town property at 460 Shootflying Hill Road any personal watercraft
(vessel) propelled by a water jet pump as its primary source of motive
power and which is designed to be operated by persons sitting,
standing or kneeling on the vessel. [Added 8-17-2006 by Order No.
2007-0124]
B.
4. Editor's Note: This ordinance also stated that it would take effect upon approval by the
Massachusetts Department of Fish and Game Public Access Board.
§ 32-1 BEACHES AND WATERWAYS § 32-3
32:49

ARTICLE II
Obstruction of Public Access
[Adopted 11-5-1979; approved 2-26-1980 (Art. XXXIII of Ch. III of
the General Ordinances as updated through 7-7-2003)]
§ 32-4. Obstruction prohibited.
No person other than a duly authorized official of the Town of Barnstable
shall obstruct or cause to be obstructed any way, dock, wharf, landing or
other land of the Town giving access to any water or waterway, either inland
or tidal.
§ 32-5. Erection of signs by other than Town officials prohibited.
No person other than a duly authorized official of the Town of Barnstable
shall erect or maintain signs in, on, or near any way, dock, wharf, landing
or other land of the Town giving access to any water or waterway which
indicate or tend to indicate that the public has no right of access thereto.
§ 32-6. Denial of access by other than Town officials prohibited.
No person other than a duly authorized official of the Town of Barnstable
shall deny access to the public to any dock, wharf, landing or other land of
the Town giving access to any water or waterway, or utter any word or take
any action which would tend to deny such access.
§ 32-7. Town Manager authorized to make rules and regulations.
The Town Manager may make reasonable rules and regulations relative to
public access to the tidal and inland waters and waterways of the Town, not
inconsistent with the foregoing. Such rules and regulations may include, but
need not be limited to, specification of the area or areas to which this article
applies. Such rules and regulations shall take effect when filed with the
Town Clerk and after publication in a newspaper having general circulation
in the Town, or at such later date as may be specified therein.
§ 32-8. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating the provisions of this article shall be punished by a fine
not to exceed $200 for each offense. Each day such an offense continues
shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 32-4 BEACHES AND WATERWAYS § 32-8
32:51

ARTICLE III
Approval for Buttresses and Dolphins
[Adopted 11-3-1994 by Order No. 95-048 (Art. LVIII of Ch. III of the
General Ordinances as updated through 7-7-2003)]
§ 32-9. Certificate of appropriateness required.
In addition to other permits, which include those necessary for navigational
safety prior to the installation of buttresses, marine fenders, caisson or
dolphin piles in Hyannis Harbor or any other harbor of the Town a
certificate of appropriateness must be granted by the Barnstable Historic
Commission or a District Historic Commission, if one exists, before building
of the same to assure proportion, balance, design, texture, color, materials
with the harbor in which they are to be installed in order to protect the
historic and community character of the Town, the beauty of our harbors,
and to promote styles that are indigenous to Cape Cod.
§ 32-10. Definitions.5
As used in this article, the term "stand-alone fender, caisson or dolphin" pile
or buttresses shall mean any stand-alone structure secured in land under
the ocean or in the intertidal zone and composed of a cluster of five or more
timber piles; or a cluster of two or more steel or metal pipes, piles or Ibeams;
or any concrete pile; or any structure composed of concrete and
metal.
§ 32-11. Violations and penalties.
Violations of this article may result in a fine not to exceed $300 per day until
such certificate is obtained.
5. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 32-9 BEACHES AND WATERWAYS § 32-11
32:53
Chapter 37
BOARDS, COMMITTEES AND COMMISSIONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Administrative Code — See Ch. 241. Officers and employees — See Ch. 138.
§ 32-11 BARNSTABLE CODE § 32-11
32:54
ARTICLE I
Appointments Committee
[Adopted 7-21-1994 by Order No. 94-185 (Art. II of Chapter I of Ch.
of the General Ordinances as updated through 7-7-2003)]
§ 37-1. Membership.
There shall be a standing Appointments Committee of the Town Council
which shall consist of five members. At least three out of the five members
should be Town Councilors.
§ 37-2. Term of office.
All members shall serve for one year commencing after the annual
reorganization of the Town Council.
§ 37-3. Appointment of members.
The Councilors serving on the Appointments Standing Committee will be
appointed by the President of the Council from a list of names of those
Councilors who wish to serve on the Appointments Committee. The total
Council will be apprised of the names of those Councilors who are willing
to serve. The full Council will have the final vote on all appointments to the
Appointments Committee.
§ 37-4. At-large volunteers; advertising for volunteers.
The volunteers at-large will be appointed by the President of the Council,
with approval of the full Council. Advertising for the volunteers will be done
by the Council, after the annual reorganization of the Town Council.
§ 37-5. Recommendation of slate of volunteers.
In accordance with Council rules, the Appointments Committee
recommends to the Town Council a slate of persons to be reappointed or
appointed to volunteer boards.
§ 37-6. Invitation for letters of interest.
The Appointments Committee will advertise by press release, at least twice
a year, inviting Town residents to submit letters of interest to the Town of
Barnstable Talent Bank indicating in what areas they would like to serve.
On an as-needed basis, the Appointments Committee will request letters
of interest for openings on specific multimember boards, committees and
commissions.
§ 37-7. Interviewing of candidates.
Resumes will be gathered along with letters of interest, and interviews will
be conducted with new candidates. Optimally, interviews will be conducted
with candidates for reappointment at least every three years.
§ 37-1 BEACHES AND WATERWAYS § 37-7
32:55

ARTICLE II
Absentee Members
[Adopted 9-4-2008 by Order No. 2009-013]
§ 37-8. Absentee voting members of certain boards, committees and
commissions.
In accordance with Massachusetts General Laws Chapter 39, Section 23D,
an absentee voting member of any of the boards, committees and
commissions of the Town of Barnstable holding an adjudicatory hearing
shall not be disqualified from voting solely on the basis of missing a single
session so long as the following criteria are met:
The absentee voting member shall be absent from no more than a single
session of the hearing at which testimony or other evidence is received;
A.
Prior to voting, the absentee member shall certify, in writing, that he
has examined all evidence received at the missed session and watched
the video recording of the missed session, or, if no video recording is
available, then has listened to the audio tape or reviewed a verbatim
transcript of the missed session; and
B.
The absentee member shall certify, in writing, which evidence was
reviewed, and the written certification shall be made part of the record
and shall be filed with the Town Clerk; and
C.
Provided that no other member of the same board, committee or
commission sitting on the same matter has invoked this provision.
D.
§ 37-8 BEACHES AND WATERWAYS § 37-8
32:57
Chapter 40
BOATS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Noncriminal disposition — See Ch. 1, Art. I.
Beaches and waterways — See Ch. 32.
Marinas — See Ch. 405.
Mooring — See Ch. 406.
§ 37-8 BARNSTABLE CODE § 37-8
32:58
ARTICLE I
Operation
[Adopted 3-8-1967; approved 6-5-1967 (Art. XIV of Ch. III of the
General Ordinances as updated through 7-7-2003)]
§ 40-1. Speed and horsepower.
§ 40-2. Pollution prohibited.
The discharge or disposal of oil, dead fish, garbage, waste, rubbish or debris
on the waters, shores or foreshores is prohibited.
§ 40-3. Abandonment. [Amended 4-7-1971; approved 6-22-1971;
11-5-1977; approved 1-12-1978; 7-12-2012 by Order No. 2012-155]
§ 40-4. Operation and responsibility. [Amended 7-12-2012 by Order
No. 2012-155]
Speed shall not exceed six miles per hour, and no wash shall be created
in posted speed/wake areas nor within 150 feet of bathers, divers,
small vessels propelled by means other than machinery, and vessels
not underway. In posted marked navigational channels, the speed/wake
restriction shall extend 150 feet from the sides of the channel.
[Amended 7-12-2012 by Order No. 2012-155]
A.
Speed shall not exceed six miles per hour, and no wash shall be created
on any pond not a great pond and on the following great ponds:
Garrett's Pond, Micah's Pond, Joshua's Pond, Neck Pond, and Parker's
Pond. Speed shall not exceed 35 miles per hour on Lake Wequaquet.
B.
Horsepower of internal combustion engines shall not exceed 10
horsepower on the following ponds: Hamblin's Pond; Middle Pond;
Mystic Lake, Long Pond, Centerville, Lovell's Pond, Shubael's Pond,
Long Pond, Marstons Mills.
C.
No vessel, mooring or other object shall be abandoned, sunk or
otherwise placed where it may constitute a danger to navigation. Any
vessel, mooring or object so placed, and any vessel improperly secured,
swamped, sunk, washed ashore or found in a restricted area, may be
removed or relocated by direction of the Harbormaster or an Assistant
Harbormaster if corrective action is not taken after 72 hours' notice to
the owner, or if the owner is not known, after notice has been posted
for the same period at the Town Hall or on or near such vessel, mooring
or object. The expense of such removal or relocation, and any liability
incurred therefor, shall be the responsibility of the owner.
A.
Nothing in the above shall be deemed to restrict earlier action by the
Harbormaster or an Assistant Harbormaster, with or without notice to
the owner, if, in their judgment, such action is necessary to protect life
or property.
B.
§ 40-1 BEACHES AND WATERWAYS § 40-4
32:59
§ 40-5. Water skiing.
Vessel operators are responsible for their wake at all times and shall not
operate a vessel in a reckless or negligent manner so as to endanger
the life, safety, or property of any person.
A.
No person shall operate or maintain any vessel in a manner that
violates MGL c. 90B, or any regulations adopted thereunder, or any
other state or federal law that may apply.
B.
Water skiing is prohibited on any pond not a great pond and on the
following great ponds: Garrett's Pond, the Hathaway Ponds, Micah's
Pond, Joshua's Pond, Neck Pond and Parker's Pond. Water skiing is
prohibited on East Bay, West Bay, Cotuit Bay and all tidal inlets and
rivers.
A.
Water skiing as hereinafter permitted is subject to the provisions of
MGL c. 90B, § 8, and to the further restriction that there shall be no
water skiing within 150 feet of bathers, divers, piers, docks, floats,
moorings, other boats or of the shore. Additionally there shall be no
water skiing within 300 feet of a shoreline being used as a swimming
area whether public or private. For the purpose of this article, the
words "water skiing" shall include the towing or manipulation of a
surfboard, tube or other similar device behind a vessel. [Amended
7-12-2012 by Order No. 2012-155; 4-25-2013 by Order No.
2013-083]
B.
Water skiing is permitted on Great Ponds except those previously
named.
C.
Water skiing is permitted on Cape Cod Bay, Nantucket Sound,
Popponesset Bay and in the following bay and harbor areas described
below:
That portion of North Bay lying westerly of a line running from a
pier on St. Mary's Island to the northernmost tip of Little Island.
Skiing will not be permitted here on weekends and holidays.
[Amended 7-12-2012 by Order No. 2012-155]
(1)
That portion of Hyannisport Harbor lying easterly of a line running
from the stone jetty at the entrance to Stewarts Creek to the angle
point in the Hyannisport breakwater. [Amended 7-12-2012 by
Order No. 2012-155]
(2)
Hyannis Harbor, except in that portion thereof lying within 150 feet
of either side of the center line of the buoyed entrance channel
to said harbor from entrance channel buoy No. 6 to Dunbar's
Point and Lewis Bay, except in an area that lies west of a line
150 feet parallel to and east of the center line of the buoyed
entrance channel to Hyannis inner harbor. [Amended 3-28-1973;
approved 6-25-1973]
(3)
D.
§ 40-4 BARNSTABLE CODE § 40-5
32:60
§ 40-6. Divers and diving.
Any person or persons skin diving or scuba diving shall:
That portion of Barnstable Harbor lying northerly of a line running
from Calves Pasture Point through the No. 1 Buoy at Maraspin's
Creek entrance channel to the Town line at Yarmouth Creek.
[Amended 7-12-2012 by Order No. 2012-155]
(4)
Display a diver's flag consisting of a red field with a white diagonal
stripe of a size not less than 12 inches square.
A.
Display such flag on a float or other similar device holding such flag
upright at a height sufficient to be visible to passing boats.
B.
Stay within 150 feet of the aforesaid float and flag or tow the float and
flag with him while he is submerged and surface thereunder, unless for
special purposes permission is granted in writing by the Harbormaster
to otherwise display flags for the protection of divers.6
C.
6. Editor’s Note: Former §§ 40-7, 40-8 and 40-10, which immediately followed, were
renumbered as §§ 40-16, 40-17 and 40-18, respectively, by Order No. 2012-155, adopted
7-12-2012. This order also repealed former § 40-9, Jurisdiction.
§ 40-5 BEACHES AND WATERWAYS § 40-6
32:61

ARTICLE II
Houseboats and Houseboat Marinas7
[Adopted 11-1-1980; approved 2-27-1981 (Art. XXXVIII of Ch. III of
the General Ordinances as updated through 7-7-2003)]
§ 40-7. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, the words and phrases herein defined shall
be construed in accordance with the definition set forth unless it is apparent
from the context that a different meaning is intended.
HOUSEBOAT — A watercraft structure designed primarily to be occupied
as living quarters.
HOUSEBOAT MARINA — Any area within any waters of the Town where
one or more sites or locations are rented or offered for rent for the location
of houseboats which are to be used for living quarters either permanently
or on a temporary basis.
PERMANENT SEWER — A sewer connected to the sewer system of the
Town of Barnstable or to a private sewage disposal system approved by the
Board of Health.
§ 40-8. Docking and mooring of houseboats restricted to licensed
slips.
No person shall moor or dock a houseboat in the waters of the Town except
at a pier, slip or dock for which a valid current marina license has been
issued under MGL c. 91, § 59B.
§ 40-9. Use and occupancy of houseboats.
No person shall use or occupy or permit the use or occupancy of a
houseboat for living quarters either permanently or on a temporary basis on
the waters of the Town except in a houseboat marina operated pursuant to
a permit issued by the Town Manager and unless such houseboat meets the
following requirements:
There is provided within the houseboat not less than 600 square feet of
living area.
A.
The houseboat is designed and maintained so there is a single opening
above the waterline for waste and sewage removal and such opening is
tightly connected to a permanent sewer.
B.
The houseboat is designed and constructed so that it meets the
requirements of the State Building Code, including specialized codes
thereof, except insofar as the provisions thereof are not responsibly
applicable.
C.
7. Former § 40-11 through § 40-17, which immediately followed, were renumbered as § 40-7
through § 40-13, respectively, by Order No. 2012-155, adopted 7-12-2012.
§ 40-7 BEACHES AND WATERWAYS § 40-10
32:63
§ 40-10. Houseboat marina operation permit.
No person shall operate a houseboat marina or rent or hold out for rent
any site or space for the location of a houseboat to be used or occupied for
living quarters either permanently or on a temporary basis without having
a current permit for such marina from the Town Manager.
§ 40-11. Application for houseboat marina permit; standards.
Any person desiring to operate a houseboat marina shall file an
application for a permit to do so with the Town Manager and submit a
fee in the amount to be fixed by the Town Manager for processing such
application.8 Such application must be accompanied by a plan showing
the location of the proposed marina and the facilities contemplated
therein. The Town Manager shall act on such application within 60 days
after it is submitted.
A.
The Town Manager shall grant such permit if the following conditions
are met:
The applicant owns or has a lease of the land over which the marina
is proposed to be operated.
(1)
There is provided within such marina a minimum of 875 square
feet of space for the exclusive use of each houseboat and its
appurtenances to be located therein.
(2)
Prior to the time any houseboats are located therein, a permanent
float, dock or slip for the mooring or dockage of each houseboat
from which such houseboat may be directly boarded is constructed.
(3)
Each space intended for a houseboat must be provided with the
following:
A permanent water supply with an individual antibackflow
valve;
(a)
(b) A sewer connection leading into a permanent sewer; and
(c) A permanent supply of electricity.
(4)
The marina is in a zoning district of the Town where marinas are
permitted.
(5)
There is provided on land adjacent to the marina two parking
spaces for each houseboat site within the proposed marina.
(6)
B.
The Town Manager may limit the term of such permit and may impose
additional conditions on such permit deemed necessary by it to protect
the public health, welfare and safety and to promote the general
welfare.
C.
8. Editor's Note: See Ch. 405, Marinas.
§ 40-10 BARNSTABLE CODE § 40-12
32:64
§ 40-12. Houseboat marina permit revocation.
Any permit for a houseboat marina may be revoked by the Town Manager
after written notice to the operator of such marina and an opportunity to be
heard before the Town Manager. Such written notice shall be mailed to the
operator of the marina at the address shown on the permit and shall state
the date and time the Town Manager will consider the proposed revocation.
The grounds for revocation shall be:
§ 40-13. Administration.
The provisions of this article shall be administered by the Town Manager.
The Board of Health, the Department of Public Works, the Building
Commissioner and the Harbormaster shall assist the Town Manager in the
administration and enforcement of this article, each within its or their
appropriate jurisdiction. Any aggrieved person may appeal any decision of
the Town Manager, except where another method of appeal is provided by
law. The Town Manager shall make a decision on the appeal within 60 days,
and such decision shall be final.9
The houseboat marina no longer meets the conditions under which the
permit was granted.
A.
The houseboat marina has become a source of pollution of the waters
of the Town.
B.
The facilities of the marina or the houseboats located therein have
fallen into a state of disrepair.
C.
Individual houseboats are permitted or maintained within the marina
which do not meet the requirements for houseboats established by this
article.
D.
9. Editor’s Note: Former § 40-18, Violations and penalties, which immediately followed, was
repealed 7-12-2012 by Order No. 2012-155. See now § 40-17.
§ 40-12 BEACHES AND WATERWAYS § 40-13
32:65

ARTICLE III
Moorings and Anchoring
[Adopted 7-12-2012 by Order No. 2012-155]
§ 40-14. Moorings.
§ 40-15. Anchoring.
Anchoring will be allowed pursuant to the Town's Mooring Regulations.
However, no vessel shall be anchored in any marked channel or so as to
impede safe navigation.
The location, type and adequacy of every mooring must be approved
annually by the Harbormaster or an Assistant Harbormaster before
placement, and in accordance with all the provisions of the Town's
Mooring Regulations. Any mooring may be inspected, removed or
relocated whenever, in their judgment, the safety of other vessels or
maximum use of the area requires such action. The expense of such
inspection, removal or relocation, and any liability incurred therefor,
shall be the responsibility of the owner.
A.
Every mooring and every vessel attached to said mooring shall be
annually permitted by the Harbormaster.
B.
The Harbormaster shall have the authority to sell at public auction
on behalf of the Town any mooring which has been removed under
Subsection A above if said mooring has not been claimed by its owner
within 12 months.
C.
There shall be a charge for picking up/removing abandoned and illegal
moorings as follows (in addition to all costs directly associated with the
removal):
Under 100 lb $100
100 to 200 lb $150
Over 200 lb $200
D.
§ 40-14 BEACHES AND WATERWAYS § 40-15
32:67

ARTICLE IV
Enforcement; Violations and Penalties; Severability
[Adopted 7-12-2012 by Order No. 2012-155]
§ 40-16. Enforcement.
Unless otherwise specified, the provisions of this article shall be enforced
by the Harbormaster, by Assistant Harbormasters and by police officers
empowered to patrol the waters of the Town.
§ 40-17. Violations and penalties.
Whoever violates any of the provisions of this Chapter 40 or refuses or
neglects to obey the lawful and reasonable orders of those empowered to
enforce the same, or resists them in the discharge of their duties, shall be
fined in accordance with the schedule of fines set out in Chapter 1, § 1-3.
With respect to violations of Article I of this Chapter 40, each violation
thereof shall be a separate offense. With respect to violations of Articles II
and III of this Chapter 40, each day such an offense is found to occur shall
constitute a separate offense and shall be fined as a first, second, or third
and subsequent offense, as the case may be.
§ 40-18. Severability.
In the event that any provision, section or clause of this Chapter 40 is
hereafter judicially found to be invalid, such a final decision shall not affect
the validity of the remaining portions of this article.
§ 40-16 BEACHES AND WATERWAYS § 40-18
32:69
Chapter 43
BODY-PIERCING BUSINESSES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Noncriminal disposition — See Ch. 1, Art. I. Massage establishments — See Ch. 346.
§ 43-1. Qualified nurse or physician required to perform procedure;
violations and penalties.
Whoever, not being registered as a qualified nurse under § 74 of Chapter
112 of the General Laws or as a qualified physician under § 2 of Chapter 112
of the General Laws, or corresponding provisions of earlier laws, punctures
a body part, excluding the ear, of any other person as or as part of a trade
or business shall be punished by a fine of not more than $300.
Chapter 47
BUILDING CONSTRUCTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Noncriminal disposition — See Ch. 1, Art. I.
Inspection of wires — See Ch. 68.
Schedule of Fees — See Ch. 76, Art. I.
Gas piping and appliances — See Ch. 96.
Historic properties — See Ch. 112.
Wetlands protection — See Ch. 237.
Zoning — See Ch. 240.
Subdivision Rules and Regulations — See Ch.
801.
§ 47-1. Appointment of Building Commissioner; term; vacancy.
[Amended 11-5-1977, approved 1-12-1978; 11-1-1980, approved
2-27-1981]
The Town Manager shall appoint a Building Commissioner, who shall hold
office for a term of three years or until his successor is chosen and qualified,
said three-year term commencing on July 1 in the year of such appointment.
Any vacancy in the office shall be filled by the Town Manager on a
temporary basis until the next July 1.
§ 47-2. Powers and duties of Building Commissioner.
The Building Commissioner shall make such inspections, issue such permits
and enforce such regulations and ordinances as may be required by the
Town or under the State Building Code, and he may for such purposes, at
all reasonable times, enter upon such premises to carry out such lawful
procedures.
§ 40-18 BARNSTABLE CODE § 47-3
43:70
§ 47-3. Moving of buildings.
No building may be moved unless a permit has been obtained from the
Building Commissioner. No building may be moved into the Town unless its
construction is made to conform to the State Building Code.
§ 47-4. Approval of building permits by Board of Health.
All building permits are subject to the approval of the Board of Health prior
to issuance.
§ 47-5. Building restricted area.
§ 47-6. Permit fees. [Amended 1-4-1996 by Order No. 96-083]
There shall be established and collected by the Building Commissioner
upon the issuance of each permit a fee to be paid into the Town treasury
determined in accordance with the revenue fee policy established by the
Town Council. The schedule for these fees can be found in Chapter 1, Article
I, of the Code of the Town of Barnstable.
Building restrictions as set forth in this section shall be designated as
the "building restricted area" and shall apply to all that portion of the
Town bounded as follows:
All lands or that portion of land lying to the south of and within
150 feet of Main Street in the Village of Hyannis from the Yarmouth
Town line to Potter Street; and lying to the north of and within 150
feet of Main Street in the Village of Hyannis from Yarmouth Road
to Barnstable Road.
(1)
All lands or that portion of land shown on a map entitled "Map of
Extension of Building Code (Fire) in Business District, (Precinct 3)
Hyannis, January 20, 1976" which map is designated as Map "B."
(2)
All lands or that portion of land shown on a map entitled "Map of
Extension of Building Code (Fire) in Business and Urban Business
Districts (Precinct 3) Hyannis, January 20, 1967."
(3)
A.
No wood frame or wooden structures, or additions or alterations to
the same, may be built within the building restricted area, except as
hereinafter provided:
Any dwelling as defined in the State Building Code built within the
building restricted area, must have a fire-resistive roof;
(1)
An addition or alteration may be made to an existing wooden
building if it does not increase its present ground area by more
than 1/3, or by more than 600 square feet, whichever is less. No
more than one such addition or alteration shall be permitted in any
period of 60 consecutive months.
(2)
B.
§ 47-3 BUILDING CONSTRUCTION § 47-7
47:71
§ 47-7. Violations and penalties.
Whoever violates any of the provisions of this chapter shall be punished by
a fine not to exceed $200 for each offense.
Chapter 51
BUILDINGS, NUMBERING OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Noncriminal disposition — See Ch. 1, Art. I. Subdivision Rules and Regulations — See Ch.
801.
§ 51-1. Town Manager's responsibilities.
The Town Manager shall require, determine and prescribe the numbering,
changes in numbering and renumbering of buildings on or near the lines of
any and all public and private ways within the Town; said numbering shall
be consistent with a Town-wide uniform numbering system that is based on
periodic sequential points along road layout center lines.
§ 51-2. Rules and regulations.
The Town Manager shall make reasonable rules and regulations to take
effect when filed with the Town Clerk and after publication in a newspaper
published within the Town, relative to numbering, changes in numbering,
renumbering of buildings as well as to materials, location, visibility and size
of said numbers along the lines of public and private ways.
§ 51-3. Affixing and maintaining numbers on buildings.
All property owners or occupants or either of them shall affix or maintain
assigned numbers or numbering devices on buildings along the lines of
public or private ways or with access to such ways, and no person shall
willfully remove, deface, or change numbers or numbering devices placed
upon buildings under the provisions of this chapter.
§ 51-4. Violations and penalties.
Whoever violates any provision of this chapter, or any order, rule or
regulation made by the Town Manager under authority of this chapter, shall
be punished by a fine not to exceed $50.
§ 47-7 BARNSTABLE CODE § 51-4
51:72
Chapter 54
BUILDING AND PREMISES MAINTENANCE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Numbering of buildings — See Ch. 51.
Historic properties — See Ch. 112.
Rental properties — See Ch. 170.
Solid waste — See Ch. 202 and Ch. 373.
Vacant and foreclosing properties — See Ch.
224.
State Sanitary Code — See Ch. 335, Art. I.
Nuisances — See Ch. 353.
§ 54-1. Purpose and intent.
The purpose and intent of this chapter is to eliminate nuisances in the Town.
Nuisances such as trash, debris and stagnant pools of water cause and
contribute to blight within neighborhoods and commercial areas and impair
the health, safety and general welfare of the inhabitants of the Town.
§ 54-2. Applicability; compliance with other regulations.
Every owner shall maintain premises in compliance with this chapter and
with applicable provisions of the sanitary and building codes (hereinafter
"code") and regulations. Every occupant shall comply with the provisions of
§ 54-5B.
§ 54-3. Outdoor storage.
Indoor items, such as furniture, appliances, plumbing fixtures and
bedding, shall be kept within enclosed structures after seven calendar
days; all other personal property shall be kept within enclosed
structures or screened from public view after 15 calendar days. In no
case shall property covered by this subsection be stored outdoors for a
cumulative total of more than 45 calendar days in any calendar year.
A.
Functional outdoor items, such as fixtures, landscape elements, outdoor
furniture, outdoor appliances, children's play structures, firewood,
compost materials, construction materials, while construction is
ongoing, proceeding in good faith and in a timely manner and
commenced under a valid building permit if required, boats and
inventory (where such outdoor storage of inventory is in compliance
with zoning), shall not be subject to the requirements of this section.
B.
Motor vehicles, boats and trailers shall be kept in compliance with
Chapter 228, Vehicles, Storage of.
C.
§ 51-4 BUILDINGS, NUMBERING OF § 54-4
51:73
§ 54-4. Stagnant water.
Water shall not be permitted to continuously stagnate outside of any
building or structure for more than 10 days except under natural conditions.
Nothing in this chapter shall operate as a waiver or exception to any other
law, rule or regulation for the storage or handling of water.
§ 54-5. Storage and removal of rubbish, garbage and refuse.
Owners' responsibilities.
The owner of any building, structure or premises shall be
responsible for receptacles with tight-fitting lids to be used for the
proper storage of rubbish, garbage and/or other refuse. The owner
shall be responsible for disposal of rubbish, garbage and/or other
refuse at a permitted transfer station or facility unless contracted
for by the tenant.
(1)
The owner of any dwelling that contains three or more units, and
the owner of any dwelling which contains one or two units that
are rented or leased for a period of six months or less, shall be
responsible for the final collection and disposal of rubbish, garbage
and other refuse at a permitted transfer station or facility.
(2)
A.
Occupants' responsibilities.
The occupants of any building, structure or premises shall be
responsible for the proper storage of rubbish, garbage and other
refuse within receptacles with tight-fitting covers. Said occupants
shall also ensure that all tight-fitting covers are kept so that all
rubbish, garbage and other refuse that is stored outside a building
or structure is properly covered. Said occupants shall be
responsible for the proper use and cleaning of the receptacles and
keeping the premises free of rubbish, garbage and other refuse.
(1)
Unless a written lease agreement specifies otherwise, the
occupant(s) of any dwelling that contains one or two units and that
is rented or leased for any period greater than six months shall
be responsible for the collection and ultimate disposal of rubbish,
garbage and other refuse at a permitted transfer station or facility.
(2)
B.
Screening requirements for receptacles. All outdoor rubbish and
garbage storage areas shall be located in an area which is screened
from public view. Said screening may be in the form of fencing,
evergreen trees or other plants capable of providing year-round
screening, located around the refuse storage area in such a manner
to block the view of the rubbish and garbage storage area from the
neighbors and from other persons passing by, provided that receptacles
may be placed in the open near a street within 24 hours of scheduled
collection and disposal by a contractor as provided in this chapter and
returned to a screened location within 24 hours thereafter. Receptacles
shall be located in such a manner that no objectionable odors enter any
C.
§ 54-4 BARNSTABLE CODE § 54-5
51:74
§ 54-6. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
OCCUPANT — Any person who alone or severally with others rents or leases
premises, or resides overnight other than as a guest.
OWNER — Any person who alone or severally with others has legal title to
buildings, structures or vacant land, or to land with buildings or structures
thereon, or to any dwelling or rooming unit, mortgagee in possession, or
agent, trustee or person appointed by a court.
§ 54-7. Enforcement; removal or abatement of nuisance.
§ 54-8. Interpretation of provisions; severability; period of effect.
other building, structure or premises and so as to provide maximum
screening from the street.
The Director of the Health Department or her or his designee is hereby
designated as the enforcing authority for this chapter.
A.
The enforcing authority shall notify the owner and occupant, in writing,
of any alleged violation or violations of this chapter and order the owner
or occupant to remove or abate the nuisance by a date certain not
more than 10 days after service of notice of the violation(s); provided,
however, that if the violation is determined to be such that the public
health and safety will be jeopardized by that delay, the enforcing
authority may order the abatement or removal of the nuisance in a
shorter time as public health and safety may in her or his judgment
require. The order shall be in writing and may be served personally
on the owner, occupant or his authorized agent. If the violation is not
removed or abated after notice, the enforcing authority may commence
enforcement action through noncriminal, criminal or civil proceedings,
and no action shall preclude any other enforcement action or actions.
Each day of continued violation may be deemed a separate offense.
B.
In addition to any penalties or enforcement actions hereunder, after
final determination of three or more violations within a twelve-month
period an enforcing authority may notify a violator, in writing, that the
enforcing authority may elect to bill the violator for the costs incurred
by the Town for response to each subsequent violation not abated or
ordered without abatement as provided herein. Such bill(s) shall be
due and payable in full by the violator within 30 days of submission
and, if unpaid thereafter, shall be subject to a municipal charges lien as
provided in MGL c. 40, § 58.
C.
The provisions of this chapter are in addition to and not in lieu of
any other chapter, rule or regulation of the Town of Barnstable and
any board, commission or officer. Compliance with this chapter shall
not thereby constitute compliance with any other chapter, rule or
A.
§ 54-5 BUILDINGS, NUMBERING OF § 54-8
51:75
Chapter 57
CIGARETTE VENDING MACHINES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Noncriminal disposition — See Ch. 1, Art. I.
Smoking — See Ch. 371.
Tobacco sales permit fee — See Ch. 318.
§ 57-1. Sale of cigarettes by machines prohibited.
All sale of cigarettes by machine is prohibited.
§ 57-2. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating this chapter shall be fined not more than $300.
Chapter 59
COMPREHENSIVE OCCUPANCY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Noncriminal enforcement of violations — See
Ch. 1, Art. I.
Rental property — See Ch. 170.
Zoning — See Ch. 240.
Subdivision regulations — See Ch. 801.
§ 59-1. Purpose and intent.
The purpose and intent of this chapter is to guide growth in accordance with
the local comprehensive plan, so as to promote beneficial and convenient
relationships between the natural resources of the Town and its inhabitants,
to address nutrient management and other environmental, health and
safety issues resulting from overcrowding in residential dwellings.
§ 59-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
regulation, and violation of this chapter does not thereby preclude
violation of any other chapter, rule or regulation.
If any provision of this chapter is declared invalid, it shall not thereby
invalidate any other provision.
B.
§ 54-8 BARNSTABLE CODE § 59-2
57:76
BEDROOM — A room providing privacy, intended primarily for sleeping
and consisting of all of the following: (a) floor space of no less than 70
square feet; (b) a ceiling height of no less than seven feet; (c) an electrical
service and ventilation; and (d) at least one window large enough to provide
emergency egress. Living rooms, dining rooms, kitchens, halls, bathrooms,
unfinished cellars and unheated storage areas over garages are not
considered bedrooms.[Amended 10-19-2006 by Order No. 2007-033]
OCCUPANT — Any person who has attained the age of 18 who has resided
in a residential dwelling for any length of time.[Amended 1-17-2013 by
Order No. 2013-033]
RESIDENTIAL DWELLING — A single unit providing complete independent
living facilities for one or more persons, including provisions for living,
sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation.
§ 59-3. Maximum number of occupants.
The maximum number of occupants in a residential dwelling shall be
determined by the number of bedrooms contained therein. A maximum
number of two occupants is permitted for each of the first two bedrooms; for
each additional bedroom a maximum number of one occupant is permitted.
It shall be a violation of this chapter for any person in excess of that
provided herein to occupy any residential dwelling.10
§ 59-4. Exemptions. [Amended 1-17-2013 by Order No. 2013-033]
Children, grandchildren and foster children of an owner or occupant shall
be exempt from these provisions.
§ 59-5. Enforcement; violations and penalties.
§ 59-6. Severability; construal of provisions.
This chapter may be enforced by the Building Commissioner, or his
designee, the Board of Health and/or its designees or the police.
A.
The owner, lessee or person in a position of control of any dwelling unit
found in violation of this chapter shall be subject to a fine not to exceed
$300. Each day of continued violation may be deemed to be a separate
offense.
B.
This chapter may be enforced under the provisions of MGL c. 40, § 21D.
The fine for any violation under the provisions of MGL c. 40, § 21D
shall be $100. Each day of continued violation may be deemed to be a
separate offense.
C.
10.Editor’s Note: Former Subsection B, regarding the maximum number of motor vehicles
permitted, which immediately followed, was repealed 1-17-2013 by Order No. 2013-033.
§ 59-2 CIGARETTE VENDING MACHINES § 59-6
57:77
Chapter 68
ELECTRICAL STANDARDS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 47.
Fee Schedule — See Ch. 76, Art. II.
Gas piping and appliances — See Ch. 96.
Each provision of this chapter shall be construed as separate. If any
part of this chapter shall be held invalid for any reason, the remainder
shall continue in full force and effect.
A.
Nothing herein shall be construed as allowing for more bedrooms in
any residential dwelling than are otherwise permitted by any state or
local law or regulation governing health and safety.
B.
§ 59-6 BARNSTABLE CODE § 59-6
68:78
ARTICLE I
Inspection of Wires
[Adopted 3-3-1931, as amended through 1-4-1996 by Order No.
96-083 (Art. VI of Ch. III of the General Ordinances as updated
through 7-7-2003)]
§ 68-1. Applicability of state standards.
Whoever proposes to place wires designed to carry a current of electricity
or conductors or appliances for the distribution of electrical current shall be
subject to the provisions of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts Electrical
Code.
§ 68-2. Administration and enforcement.
Said Code and all penalties thereunder shall be administered and enforced
by the Wiring Inspector of the Town of Barnstable who shall be appointed
by the Town Manager annually in June, to hold office from the first of July
following for the term of one year or until his successor has been appointed
and qualified to work under the supervision of the Building Commissioner.
§ 68-3. Fees.
No placement of wires as described under § 68-1 shall be made except
upon application for and issuance of an appropriate permit by the Wiring
Inspector at a fee schedule determined in accordance with state regulations
and the revenue fee policy established by the Town Council. The schedule
for these fees can be found in Chapter 1, Article I, of the Code of the Town
of Barnstable.
§ 68-1 ELECTRICAL STANDARDS § 68-3
68:79
Chapter 76
FEES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Board of Health fees — See Ch. 318. Town Manager regulations — See Part IV.
§ 68-3 BARNSTABLE CODE § 68-3
68:80
ARTICLE I
Retention of Fees by Golf Pro
[Adopted 5-21-1992 (Art. XX of Ch. II of the General Ordinances as
updated through 7-7-2003); amended in its entirety 2-7-2008 by
Order No. 2008-076]
§ 76-1. Amount allowed to be retained.
Notwithstanding the provisions of any other ordinance of the Town to the
contrary, the golf professional and the assistant golf professional at the
Barnstable Municipal Golf Course are hereby authorized to retain, as part
of their official compensation, in addition to their salaries, the following
amounts: for the golf professional, fees not in excess of 10% of his/her
base pay annually; for the assistant golf professional, fees not in excess
of 25% of his/her base pay annually. When fees charged and received for
golf instruction exceed the percentages noted, the Town shall retain such
receipts.
§ 76-1 ELECTRICAL STANDARDS § 76-1
68:81

ARTICLE II
Schedule of Fees
[Adopted 5-6-2004 by Order No. 2004-066 (Art. XIII of Ch. II of the
General Ordinances as updated through 7-7-2003); amended in its
entirety 2-7-2008 by Order No. 2008-076]
§ 76-2. Schedule adopted.
The following Schedule of Fees shall be in effect in the Town of Barnstable.
§ 76-3. Weights and measures annual fees (MGL c. 98, § 56).
[Amended 3-4-2010 by Order No. 2010-071; 1-17-2013 by Order No.
2013-064; 5-5-2016 by Order No. 2016-077]
Fee Per Device
Description 1 to 3 4 or More
Scale with capacity
over 10,000 pounds
$275 $250
Scale with capacity
5,000 to 10,000 pounds
$145 $120
Scale with capacity 100
to 5,000 pounds
$90 $80
Scale with capacity less
than 100 pounds
$60 $55
Weights (each) $10 $8
Liquid measures $40 $40
Liquid measure meters — —
Lubricant meters $60 $55
Motor fuel meters $60 $55
Vehicle tank meters $120 $110
Vehicle tank meter
gravity
$185 $160
Bulk storage tank
meter
$185 $160
Mechanical pumps,
each stop
$15 $15
Taxi meters
(semiannually)
$60 $55
Commercial odometer -
hub odometer
$60 $65
Leather measure $185 $160
Dry measure, 1 bushel
or less
$95 $95
§ 76-2 ELECTRICAL STANDARDS § 76-3
68:83
Fee Per Device
Description 1 to 3 4 or More
Dry measure, more
than 1 bushel
$130 $130
Counting device $35 $35
All other measuring
devices
$135 $135
Rope, wire or chain
measuring devices
$135 $30
Reinspection fee (after
official rejection)
$100 $100
Reverse vending
machines
Bottle and can
redemption inspection
Disposable test
material supplied by
inspector
$35 $30
Disposable test
material supplied by
store
$20 $15
Automatic electronic
checkout systems
3 or fewer cash
registers (per
inspection)
$95
4 to 11 cash registers
(per inspection)
$180
12 or more cash
registers (per
inspection)
$300
Adjustment fee $25 $25
Legal Ad fee Actual cost of legal ad Actual cost of legal ad
Inspection/fines $10 per additional
month after 120 days
late
$10 per additional
month after 120 days
late
§ 76-3 BARNSTABLE CODE § 76-4
68:84
§ 76-4. Licenses. [Amended 3-4-2010 by Order No. 2010-071;
1-5-2012 by Order No. 2012-034; 1-17-2013 by Order No. 2013-064;
11-7-2013 by Order No. 2014-034; 5-5-2016 by Order No. 2016-077]
MGL c./Section Description Fee
40, § 22 Taxicabs/limos (Town
Manager)
$50
100, § 2 Auctioneer, annual (Town
Manager)
$15
100, § 2 Auctioneer, temporary (Town
Manager)
$10
101, § 33 Temporary license to sell for
charitable purposes
$10
101, § 33 Temporary license to sell for
charitable purposes
$10
138, § 12 Club, all alcohol $2,225
138, § 12 Club, wine and malt $1,725
138, § 12 Common victualer, all alcohol $3,050
138, § 12 Common victualer, wine and
malt
$1,950
138, § 12 Inn holder, all alcohol $3,550
138, § 12 Inn holder, wine and malt $2,450
138, § 12 General on premises, all
alcohol
$3,900
138, § 12 General on premises, wine
and malt
$3,400
138, § 12 Annual general on premises -
arts and cultural, wine and
malt
$750
138, § 12 Seasonal general on premises
- arts and cultural, wine and
malt
$1,000
138, § 12 Farmer-brewery pouring $3,050
138, § 14 One-day, all alcohol $90
138, § 14 One-day, wine and malt $40
138, § 14 One-day, beer only/wine only $35
138, § 15 Package store, all alcohol $3,025
138, § 15 Package store, wine and malt $1,950
138, § 30A Pharmacist to sell alcoholic
beverages
$2,000
140, § 2 Inns and restaurants
(common victualers)
$100
§ 76-4 ELECTRICAL STANDARDS § 76-4
68:85
MGL c./Section Description Fee
140, § 21B Nonalcoholic beverages $100
140, § 32B Mobile home parks $50
140, § 32B Motels $50
140, § 34 Lodging house
10 guests or fewer $75
More than 10 guests $125
140, § 49 License for vehicle for sale of
food
$250
140, § 54 Junk dealer (secondhand
dealer)
$50
140, § 56 Private parking lot (per
space) (Town Manager)
$14
140, § 56A Shooting gallery $100
140, § 59 Auto dealer $150
140, § 177 Pool table (each) $75
140, § 177A Automatic amusement
devices (each)
$100
140, § 181 Live theatre (theatrical
exhibitions)
$100
140, § 183A Karaoke $100
140, § 183A Entertainment
Annual, seven-day live $275
Annual, seven-day nonlive
$75
One day, not-for-profit $25
One day, for profit $50
140, § 1851 Fortune-tellers $250
140, § 186 Carousel $75
140, § 192 Rental boats (freshwater) $100
148, § 13 Storage of hazardous
materials (Town Manager)
$100
Septic system inspection fee
(Health)
$25
Board of Health request for
variance
$95
Application fee licenses and
permits
$100
Bad-check fee $25
§ 76-4 BARNSTABLE CODE § 76-4
68:86
MGL c./Section Description Fee
Annual/seasonal license late
fee
$100
Special event late filing fee $25
§ 76-5. License to store inflammables.
Description New Permit Annual Permit
1 to 500 gallons or 4,000 pounds $45 $0
500 to 999 gallons or 8,000 pounds $45 $22.50
1,000 to 4,999 gallons or 40,000
pounds
$75 $37.50
5,000 to 9,999 gallons or 80,000
pounds
$105 $52.50
10,000 to 29,999 gallons or
240,000 pounds
$135 $67.50
30,000 to 99,999 gallons or
800,000 pounds
$165 $82.50
100,000 to 199,999 gallons or
1,600,000 pounds
$240 $120
More than 200,000 gallons or
1,600,000 pounds
$330 $165
§ 76-6. Building, sign, wiring, plumbing and gas permit fees.
[Amended 3-4-2010 by Order No. 2010-071]
Building permits.
Description Fees
Residential (R03, R-4 Use Groups)
New buildings
Application fee $100
Permit fee $5.10 per $1,000 of construction
value
Additions, alterations/renovations
Application fee $50
Permit fee $5.10 per $1,000 of construction
value; $35 minimum
Commercial and all other use
groups
New buildings
Application fee $150
A.
§ 76-4 ELECTRICAL STANDARDS § 76-6
68:87
Description Fees
Permit fee $9.10 per $1,000 of construction
value
Additions, alterations/renovations
Application fee $100
Permit fee $9.10 per $1,000 of construction
value; $60 minimum
Permit fee for all other
structures
(not specified)
$9.10 per $1,000 based on actual
value; $100 minimum
Plumbing permits.
Description Fees
Residential, per unit $40/first fixture plus $12 each additional
fixture
Commercial, per unit $60/first fixture plus $15 each additional
fixture
B.
Gas permits.
Description Fees
Residential, per unit $40/first fixture plus $12 each additional
fixture
Commercial, per unit $60/first fixture plus $15 each additional
fixture
C.
Electrical permits.
Description Fees
Residential
New construction per unit $150.00
Additions/renovations
Less than 500 square feet $30.00
Greater than 500 to 1,500
square feet
$50.00
Greater than 1,500 square feet $100.00
Minor alterations/appliances $30.00
Change of service/meter $30.00
Accessory structures (garage,
barn, etc., excluding separate
meter)
$30.00
Temporary service $30.00
D.
§ 76-6 BARNSTABLE CODE § 76-6
68:88
Description Fees
Meters per unit $30.00
Smoke detectors/alarms $30.00
Commercial
New construction per unit $200, plus $25 per 1,000 square
feet greater than 4,000 square
feet
Additions/renovation
Less than 1,000 square feet $75.00
Greater than 1,000 to 2,500
square feet
$100.00
Greater than 2,500 square feet $150, plus $25 per 1,000 square
feet greater than 4,000 square
feet
Minor alterations/appliances,
etc.
$30.00
Change of service/meter $40.00
Temporary service $30.00
Signs $30.00
Carnivals/fairs
1 to 10 concessions/rides $50.00
10 concessions/rides $100.00
Signs.
Description Fees
Under 25 square feet $50.00
Over 25 to 50 square feet $75.00
Over 50 to 75 square feet $150.00
Over 75 square feet $200.00
E.
Miscellaneous permits and fees.
Description Fees
Accessory building: all use groups
Greater than 120 square feet to 500
square feet
$35.00
Greater than 500 square feet to 750
square feet
$50.00
Greater than 750 square feet to
1,000 square feet
$75.00
F.
§ 76-6 ELECTRICAL STANDARDS § 76-6
68:89
Description Fees
Greater than 1,000 square feet to
1,500 square feet
$100.00
Greater than 1,500 square feet Same as new building permit
based on actual cost
Change of permit holder $35.00
Pre-Building Code structure, certificate
of occupancy
$75.00
Change of use permit (no construction) $25.00
Foundation permit (separate from
building permit for cause only)
$35.00
Zoning compliance certificate (lots/
existing uses/structures)
$50.00 minimum plus
research time
Reinspections (for work not ready for
inspection, incomplete work or failure
of inspectors to gain access to
premises)
$100.00
Removal of stop-work order $50.00
Replacement of lost permit inspection
cards
$50.00
Chimney/fireplace (new and
reconstruction)
$35.00
Certificates of inspection $10 increase CMR 780 Table
106;
$50.00 minimum
Permit renewals
First renewal $50.00
Second renewal (for cause only) $75.00
In-ground swimming pools $125.00
Aboveground swimming pools $75.00
Decks, open porch $60.00
Relocation/moving (includes new
foundation)
$250.00
Demolition
Residential principal buildings Minimum $125.00 $5.10 per
$1,000 of construction value
Accessory buildings $50.00
Commercial buildings $9.10 per $1,000 of
construction value
Home occupation (no construction) $35.00
§ 76-6 BARNSTABLE CODE § 76-6
68:90
Description Fees
Pre-permit plan review (one- and twofamily)
$75.00
Temporary residential certificate of
occupancy (for cause only)
$75.00
Residential certificate of occupancy $25.00
Temporary commercial certificate of
occupancy (for cause only)
$75.00
Commercial certificate of occupancy $75.00
Pre-permit plan fees $100.00
Site plan (fees)
Project construction cost
Under $5,000 $100.00
$5,000 to $14,999 $200.00
$15,000 to $49,999 $250.00
$50,000 to $249,999 $350.00
$250,000 or more $500.00
Permit related to work begun prior to
time allowed for acquiring permits
under Building, Electrical, Plumbing
and Gas Code
Two times permit cost
Express permits.
Description Fees
Minimum $35.00
Residing/reroofing (residential) $5.10 per $1,000 of construction
value
Wood/coal stoves $35.00
Replacement windows $35.00
Sheds under 120 square feet $35.00
Others (as determined by
inspector)
$35.00
G.
Tents. (See § 240-9D of Ch. 240, Zoning.)
Description Fees
Residential $25.00
Fund-raiser/special event/
nonprofit agency
$25.00
Commercial (temporary
accessory structure)
$100.00
H.
§ 76-6 ELECTRICAL STANDARDS § 76-6
68:91
§ 76-7. Newsracks.
For a permit or renewal of a permit for newsracks pursuant to § 130-5: $50.
§ 76-8. Outdoor business licenses.
For outdoor business licenses pursuant to § 141-6:
§ 76-9. Tourist camps.
For tourist camps pursuant to § 217-4:
§ 76-10. Town Clerk's fees. [Added 2-17-2011 by Order No.
2011-05211]
MGL c. 262,
§ 34, Clause Description Fee
1 For filing and indexing assignment for
benefit of creditors
$10
11 Entering amendment of a record of
the birth of a child born out of
wedlock subsequently legitimized
$20
12 Correcting errors in a record of birth $20
13 Furnishing certificate of a birth $10
13A Furnishing an abstract copy of a
record of birth
$10
Research and furnish an ancient (over
100 years) vital record
$20
14 Entering delayed record of birth $20
Description Fees
Organized and supervised
recreational camp (special
permit required)
$50.00
A. Annual fee: $400.
B. When issued after October 15: $200.
C. For charitable organizations (special license): $25.
A. Permit: $10 per tourist camp.
B. Renewal fee: $10 per tourist camp.
11.Editor's Note: This order also renumbered former § 76-10 as § 76-16.
§ 76-6 BARNSTABLE CODE § 76-10
68:92
MGL c. 262,
§ 34, Clause Description Fee
20 Filing certificate of a person
conducting business under any title
other than his real name (good for
four years)
$40
21 For filing by a person conducting
business under any title other than
his real name; statement of change of
his residence, or discontinuance,
retirement or withdrawal from, or
change of location of, such business
$20
22 Furnishing certified copy of certificate
of person conducting business under
any title other than his real name or a
statement by such a person of his
discontinuance, retirement or
withdrawal from such business
$10
23 Recording the name and address, the
date and number of certificate issued
to a person registered for the practice
of podiatry in the commonwealth
$25
29 Correcting errors in a record of death $20
30 Furnishing a certificate of death $10
30A Furnishing an abstract copy of a
record of death
$10
42 Entering notice of intention of
marriage and issuing certificate
$41
43 Entering certificate of marriage filed
by persons married out of the
commonwealth
$20
44 Issuing certificate of marriage
(certified)
$10
44A Furnishing an abstract copy of a
record of marriage
$10
45 Correcting errors in a record of
marriage
$20
54 Recording power of attorney $20
57 Recording certificate of registration
granted to a person engaged in the
practice of optometry, or issuing a
certified copy thereof
$25
§ 76-10 ELECTRICAL STANDARDS § 76-10
68:93
MGL c. 262,
§ 34, Clause Description Fee
58 Recording the name of the owner of a
certificate of registration as a
physician or osteopath in the
commonwealth
$25
62 Recording order granting locations of
poles, piers, abutments or conduits,
alterations or transfers thereof, and
increase in number of wires and cable
or attachments under the provisions
of Sec. 22 of Chapter 166
Flat rate $40
Additional fee $10
66 Examining records or papers relating
to birth, marriage or deaths upon the
application of any person, the actual
expense thereof, but not less than
$10
67 Copying any manuscript or record
pertaining to a birth, marriage or
death
$5
69 For receiving and filing a complete
inventory of all items to be included in
a closing out sale, etc.
First page $10
Plus each additional page $2
75 For filing a copy of written instrument
or declaration of trust by the trustees
of an association or trust, or any
amendment thereof as provided by
Chapter 182, § 2
$20
79 Recording any other documents $10
Issuing burial permits $5
Certification of any document from
our office not named
$10
Raffle permit (nonprofit
organizations)
$10
§ 76-10 BARNSTABLE CODE § 76-11
68:94
§ 76-11. Town Collector's fees. [Added 2-17-2011 by Order No.
2011-052]
MGL Chapter
and Section Description Fee
60 § 23 Municipal lien certificates $40
60 § 15, cl. 2 Demand fees for personal property,
real estate and excise taxes
$15
§ 76-12. through § 76-15. (Reserved)
§ 76-11 ELECTRICAL STANDARDS § 76-12
68:95

ARTICLE III
Exception for Water Tower Construction Projects
[Adopted 4-16-2009 by Order No. 2009-086]
§ 76-16. Exemption from payment of fees.
Notwithstanding the provisions of any other ordinance of the Town
regarding Schedules of Fees, water tower construction project(s) shall
hereby be exempt from payment of such fees.
§ 76-16 ELECTRICAL STANDARDS § 76-16
68:97
Chapter 78
FERTILIZER NITROGEN AND PHOSPHOROUS CONTROL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Hazardous materials — See Ch. 108.
Trees — See Ch. 221.
Wetlands protection — See Ch. 237.
Herbicides — See Ch. 332.
Toxic and hazardous materials — See Ch. 381.
Wells — See Ch. 397.
Wetlands buffer zone activity — See Ch. 704.
§ 78-1. Purposes and intent.
§ 78-2. Applicability.
§ 78-3. Statutory authority.
This chapter is adopted as implementing regulations pursuant to and as
authorized by the Fertilizer Management District of Critical Planning
Excessive nutrient enrichment of the region's groundwaters and
surface waters may have significant public health ramifications,
including direct detrimental effects on drinking water sources by
increased concentrations of nitrates that can violate safe drinking
water standards, and have negative impacts on economic,
environmental and recreational resources and values in the Town and
region.
A.
The Town has significant glacially deposited sandy soils that are subject
to rapid water infiltration, percolation, and leaching of nutrients.
B.
This chapter incorporates by reference the University of Massachusetts
Extension's Turf Management Best Management Practices. These
practices, if followed, are deemed to protect the public health, safety
and welfare and aid in achieving compliance with the total maximum
daily loads (TMDL) for the Town's water resources prescribed by the
Commonwealth of Massachusetts while allowing reasonable use of
fertilizers for the enhancement and maintenance of turf quality.
C.
This chapter provides for a reduction of nitrogen and phosphorus
entering the Town's waters and wetlands by means of an organized
system of education, certification, standardization and regulation of
practice. This chapter is not intended to eliminate the use of fertilizer.
A.
This chapter adopts the best management practices as the normal
operating procedures for turf management but not plants other than
turf.
B.
§ 76-16 BARNSTABLE CODE § 78-3
68:98
Concern designation, Barnstable County Ordinance 13-07, and by Section 9
of Chapter 262 of the Acts of 2012.
§ 78-4. Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words shall have the
following meanings unless the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
AGRICULTURE/AGRICULTURAL USE — Farming in all of its branches,
including the cultivation and tillage of the soil, the production, cultivation,
growing, and harvesting of any agricultural, floricultural or horticultural
commodities, including but not limited to cranberries.
BARNSTABLE — The Town and all of its waters.
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMP) — A sequence of activities
designed to limit a nonpoint pollution source. For the purposes of this
chapter and pursuant to § 78-5A of this chapter, "BMP" means the edition
of Best Management Practices for Soil and Nutrient Management in Turf
Systems, prepared by the University of Massachusetts Extension, Center for
Agriculture, Turf Program in effect on September 18, 2014.
CERTIFIED FERTILIZER APPLICATOR — An applicator certified in the
manner prescribed hereunder to apply fertilizer and manage turf in
conformance with the BMP.
COMBINATION PRODUCTS — Sometimes known as "weed and feed,"
means any product that, in combination with fertilizer, contains pre- or
post-emergence herbicides, insecticides, other pesticides or plant growth
regulators.
COMPOST — The biologically stable humus-like material derived from
composting, or the aerobic, thermophilic decomposition of organic matter,
which is used as a fertility source for turf.
FERTILIZER — A substance that enriches turf with elements essential for
plant growth, such as nitrogen, phosphorus, or other substances; fertilizer
hereunder does not include dolomite, limestone, or lime, grass clippings, or
compost/compost tea. "Fertilize, fertilizing, or fertilization" means the act of
applying fertilizer to turf.
FERTILIZER APPLICATOR — Any person who applies fertilizer to turf and
soils.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE — A surface that has been compacted or covered
with a layer of material so that it is highly resistant to infiltration by water,
except for compacted areas on athletic fields, such as clay or baseball
infields, intensely trafficked turf and the like.
LANDSCAPE PROFESSIONAL — A person, either as a sole proprietor or as
part of a company, who, in exchange for money, goods, services, or other
consideration, performs landscaping services. A landscape professional can
include turf management staff at a private golf course operation or other
private entity.
§ 78-3 ELECTRICAL STANDARDS § 78-4
68:99
LANDSCAPING — For purposes of this chapter, establishment (including by
sod, seeding, or transplanting), renovation, maintenance, management or
fertilization of turf.
MUNICIPAL APPLICATOR — A public employee of a city, town, the county,
or the state or federal government (or an employee of a department of
and within such public entity) who fertilizes and manages turf located on
property owned or controlled by a town, the county, the state or federal
government (including publicly owned golf courses and athletic fields)
within the scope of their official public employment responsibilities.
NONCERTIFIED FERTILIZER APPLICATOR — An applicator who is not
certified in the manner prescribed hereunder to manage turf and apply
fertilizer in conformance with the BMP.
NUTRIENT — Any of the following 17 elements needed for growth of a
plant: the three nonmineral elements: carbon, hydrogen, and oxygen; the
six macronutrients: nitrogen, phosphorus, potassium, calcium, magnesium,
and sulfur; and the eight micronutrients: boron, copper, iron, chloride,
manganese, molybdenum, nickel and zinc.
NUTRIENT MANAGEMENT — The systematic control of the application and
availability of nutrients to plants in order to minimize nutrient loss and to
maintain the productivity of the soil.
READILY AVAILABLE NITROGEN — Any water-soluble nitrogen (WSN) that
is readily available to turf after application.
SLOW-RELEASE, CONTROLLED-RELEASE, TIMED-RELEASE, or SLOWLY
SOLUBLE/AVAILABLE NITROGEN — Nitrogen in a form that delays its
availability for uptake and use after application, and is not rapidly available
to turf.
SOIL — The uppermost layer of the earth's surface, comprised of mineral
and organic matter, which can host biological communities.
SOIL TEST — A technical analysis of soil conducted by a soil testing
laboratory that uses standards recommended by and in agreement with the
University of Massachusetts Amherst Extension Program BMP, including a
Modified Morgan soil testing procedure and extractable nutrient values.
TURF — Grass-covered soil held together by the roots of the grass, also
known as "sod" or "lawn."
WATERS or WATER/BODIES — Includes, but are not limited to, streams,
including intermittent streams, creeks, rivers, freshwater and tidal
wetlands, ponds, lakes, marine waters, canals, lagoons, and estuaries within
the Town, including without limitation all waters defined in Massachusetts
General Laws, Chapter 131, Section 40, and the Town Wetland Ordinance or
Regulations, with the exception of the following: coastal and inland banks,
beaches, coastal dunes, dune fields, and lands subject to coastal storm
flowage, inland or coastal flooding or inundation, or within 100 feet of the
hundred-year storm line.
§ 78-5. Standards of performance.
§ 78-4 BARNSTABLE CODE § 78-5
68:100
Best management practices. The best management practices (BMP), as
defined herein, shall be applied to the standards of performance.
A.
Performance standards for noncertified fertilizer applicators. Fertilizer
applicators who do not hold fertilizer certification issued in accordance
with § 78-6B of this chapter shall comply with the following standards
for fertilizer applications to turf:
Noncertified fertilizer applicators shall not apply fertilizer during
or immediately prior to heavy rainfall, such as but not limited to
thunderstorms, hurricanes, or northeastern storms, or when the
soil is saturated due to intense or extended rainfall;
(1)
Noncertified fertilizer applicators shall not apply fertilizer or
compost between November 12 and the following March 31;
(2)
Noncertified fertilizer applicators shall not apply, spill, or deposit
fertilizer on any impervious surface and fail to remove the applied,
spilled, or deposited fertilizer immediately (and in which case the
applicator shall then either contain, dispose of legally or apply the
fertilizer as allowed), and shall not apply, spill or deposit fertilizer
in a manner that allows fertilizer to enter into storm drains;
(3)
Unless the Town's existing laws and regulations, including its
Wetland Ordinance or Regulations, contain a stricter standard or
other enforcement or approval mechanism such as through the
Town's Conservation Commission, which shall control, noncertified
fertilizer applicators shall not apply fertilizer closer than 100 feet
to any water body, or within the Zone I of a public drinking water
well unless permission is obtained through the enforcement
authority set out in § 78-6D(1) herein allowing such activity;
(4)
A noncertified fertilizer applicator shall not apply fertilizer that
contains phosphorus, unless a soil test taken not more than three
years before the proposed fertilizer application indicates that
additional phosphorus is needed for growth of that turf, or unless
establishing new turf or reestablishing or repairing turf after
substantial damage or land disturbance, in which case the
application shall be in compliance with the BMP;
(5)
A single application of fertilizer that contains nitrogen shall not
exceed 1.0 pounds of actual nitrogen per thousand square feet,
shall consist of at least 20% slow-release nitrogen fertilizer (NOTE:
This represents the minimum percentage: use of higher SRN
content is generally preferable, especially on sandy root zones,
during stress and pre-stress periods, and when there are fewer
annual applications of nitrogen made to a lawn.) and the annual
rate shall not exceed 3.2 pounds of actual nitrogen per thousand
square feet. Single applications shall be done at intervals of no less
than four weeks until the annual maximum is reached;
(6)
B.
§ 78-5 ELECTRICAL STANDARDS § 78-5
68:101
§ 78-6. Education; certification; enforcement; penalties.
The fertilizer application requirements of this § 78-5B shall apply
with the same limitations to combination products, i.e., amount of
nitrogen applied, vicinity of water bodies, etc;
(7)
Noncertified fertilizer applicators shall not deposit grass clippings,
leaves, or any other vegetative debris into or within 50 feet of
water bodies, retention and detention areas, drainage ditches or
stormwater drains, or onto impervious surfaces, such as, but not
limited to, roadways and sidewalks, except during scheduled cleanup
programs.
(8)
Performance standards for certified fertilizer applicators. Certified
fertilizer applicators shall be exempt from the requirements set forth in
§ 78-5B of this chapter, provided that they shall manage turf and apply
fertilizer to turf in accordance with the BMP. The burden shall be on the
certified fertilizer applicator, if and as required, to show that he/she is
applying fertilizer in accordance with the BMP.
C.
Exemptions. The following activities shall be exempt from this chapter:
Application of fertilizer as a fertility source for agriculture and
agricultural use.
(1)
Application of fertilizer as a fertility source to home gardens,
landscape ornamentals, shrubs, trees bushes, vegetables, fruit and
container plants.
(2)
D.
Fertilizer/turf management education. Fertilizer education may consist
of, but is not limited to, collaboration with retailers to post in-store
information on Town fertilizer regulations, the BMP and fertilizer
certification requirements; mailings and flyers for the general public
concerning Town fertilizer regulations, the BMP and fertilizer
certification requirements; and outreach to landscape professionals and
municipal applicators concerning fertilizer-related laws, the BMP and
fertilizer certification requirements. The Town may rely on Cape Cod
Cooperative Extension to assist in maintaining a program of fertilizer
and turf management education that is based on the BMP.
A.
Fertilizer certification.
The Town may seek the assistance of the Cape Cod Cooperative
Extension to establish application requirements for and the process
required to obtain fertilizer certification and renewals thereof,
including evidence that the applicant is proficient in the BMP. Any
noncertified fertilizer applicator may then apply to the Town or
Cape Cod Cooperative Extension, as the case may be, for fertilizer
certification as a certified fertilizer applicator.
(1)
Notwithstanding the requirement for a proficiency assessment set
out in § 78-6B(1) above, municipal applicators or landscape
(2)
B.
§ 78-5 BARNSTABLE CODE § 78-6
68:102
professionals who meet the following criteria shall be presumed
to be proficient in the BMP and may become certified fertilizer
applicators without the need for an additional proficiency
assessment or fees:
Current Massachusetts pesticide commercial applicator
license (Category 00) or commercial applicator license with
turf certification (Category 37) or commercial applicator
license with shade tree and ornamentals certification
(Category 36), with evidence of participation in a recognized
continuing education program for turf management within the
past year; or
(a)
Active membership in the Cape Cod Landscapers Association,
the Golf Course Superintendents Association of Cape Cod,
Massachusetts Association of Lawn Care Professionals
(MALCP) or a substantially similar organization and any one of
the following:
Associate's Degree or higher in turf management, or
closely related field, with evidence of participation in a
recognized continuing education program for turf
management within the past year;
[1]
Current Massachusetts Certified Landscape Professional
(MCLP) certification or current Massachusetts Certified
Arborist (MCA) certification, or substantially similar
professional certification with emphasis on turf
management, with evidence of participation in a
recognized continuing education program for turf
management within the past year;
[2]
Certificate of Completion from the University of
Massachusetts Extension Green School (Turf or Landscape
sections) or the University of Massachusetts Winter School
for Turf Managers, or a horticultural certificate from Cape
Cod Community College, or substantially similar
professional certification with emphasis on turf
management, with evidence of participation in a
recognized continuing education program for turf
management within the past year.
[3]
(b)
The Town may seek the assistance of the Cape Cod Cooperative
Extension to help develop or administer an assessment to
determine an applicator's proficiency in the BMP and to assist
with or administer a fertilizer certification process, which if
administered by the Extension, may be a county-wide process.
(3)
Municipal applicators or landscape professionals who are
noncertified fertilizer applicators may nonetheless apply fertilizer
and manage turf pursuant to the standards for certified fertilizer
applicators set out in § 78-5C of this chapter so long as they
(4)
§ 78-6 ELECTRICAL STANDARDS § 78-6
68:103
fertilize and manage turf under the direct supervision of a manager
or supervisor who has attained fertilizer certification hereunder.
"Direct supervision" shall mean the instruction and control by such
manager or supervisor who is responsible for fertilizer applications
made and that person making them, and who is either physically
present at the time and place the fertilizer is applied, or if not
physically present, is available if and when needed.
All certified fertilizer applicators shall ensure that a copy of the
official documentation of said fertilizer certification is readily
available when and at the location fertilizer is being applied, and
shall provide such certification when requested to do so by an
officer or agent of the enforcement authority set out in § 78-6D(1)
herein.
(5)
All certified fertilizer applicators who apply plant nutrients shall
maintain records for three years of each application made. The
following information shall be recorded, when applicable:
(a) Name of applicator;
(b) Date of application;
(c) Address or location description of the application site;
(d) Type and amount of nutrients applied;
(e) Size of the area being treated;
(f) Representative nutrient value or values (e.g., soil tests);
(g) Plant nutrient analysis of product used;
(h) Method and rate of application;
(i) Total amount used;
An original or legible copy of the label of the plant nutrient;
and
(j)
The implementation of all activities or protocols recommended
or required by the nutrient management plan, if applicable.
(k)
(6)
The records required under this § 78-6B shall be made available for
inspection by the Town's Director of Public Health.
(7)
Retailer requirements. Any retailer who sells, or offers for sale,
phosphorus-containing fertilizer shall:
Display the product separately from nonphosphorus plant
nutrients;
(1)
Post in a location where phosphorus-containing fertilizer is
displayed a clearly visible sign, provided by the Town, at least
8 1/2 inches by 11 inches in dimension, which reads as follows:
(2)
C.
§ 78-6 BARNSTABLE CODE § 78-6
68:104
§ 78-7. Severability.
Should any section, part or provision of this chapter be deemed invalid by
a court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity
of the remaining terms of this chapter as a whole or any part thereof, other
"PHOSPHORUS RUNOFF POSES A THREAT TO WATER QUALITY.
THEREFORE, UNDER GL Ch. 128 sec. 65A, PHOSPHORUS
CONTAINING FERTILIZER MAY ONLY BE APPLIED TO LAWN OR
NON-AGRICULTURAL TURF WHEN (i) a soil test indicates that
additional phosphorus is needed for the growth of that lawn or nonagricultural
turf; or (ii) it is used for newly established lawn or nonagricultural
turf during the first growing season."
Post education materials on proper soil testing and use of fertilizers
in a prominent location where fertilizer is being sold.
(3)
Enforcement.
Enforcement authority. This chapter shall be enforced by the
Town's Board of Health, through its Director of Public Health;
provided, however, that the Town's Conservation Commission shall
enforce the provisions of § 78-5B(4) and (8).
(1)
For first and second offense within a twelve-month period. After
the first year from the effective date of this chapter, whoever
violates any provision of this chapter by committing a first or
second offense may be penalized as follows:
(a) First offense: a written warning shall be issued;
Second offense within a twelve-month period: either by
attending an education program under § 78-6A or by obtaining
a certification under § 78-6B.
(b)
(2)
Noncriminal disposition. After the first year from the effective date
of this chapter, whoever violates any provision of this chapter three
or more times in a twelve-month period may be penalized by a
noncriminal disposition process as provided in MGL c. 40, § 21D
and the Town's noncriminal disposition ordinance. If noncriminal
disposition is elected, then any person who violates any provision
of this chapter shall be subject to a penalty of not more than $300
for each violation.
(3)
Other remedies. The Town's Board of Health, through its Director
of Public Health, or the Town's Conservation Commission for
violations of § 78-5B(4) and (8) may enforce this chapter or enjoin
violations thereof through any lawful process, and the election
of one remedy by the Town's Director of Public Health and the
Conservation Commission shall not preclude enforcement through
any other lawful means.
(4)
D.
§ 78-6 ELECTRICAL STANDARDS § 78-7
68:105
than the section, part or provision held invalid, which shall remain in full
force and effect.
§ 78-8. Amendments.
§ 78-9. When effective.
The effective date of this chapter shall be the date the fertilizer certification
process outlined in § 78-6B herein is implemented and in effect.
Chapter 80
FIRE LANES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Noncriminal disposition — See Ch. 1, Art. I.
§ 80-1. Power of Town Manager.
Under the authority of General Laws Chapter 40, § 21, Clause 24, the
Town Manager may require and prescribe the establishment of fire lanes
whenever public safety and necessity so require, and may prescribe the
method by which it shall be done.
§ 80-2. Order to establish fire lanes on certain properties.
Any person or body, that has lawful control of a public or private way
or of improved or enclosed property used as off-street parking areas for
businesses, shopping malls, theaters, auditoriums, sporting or recreational
facilities, cultural centers, multiple-family and residential dwellings,
hospitals, nursing homes, or any other place where the public has a right of
No amendment to this chapter shall be adopted until such time as the
Town Council shall hold a public hearing thereon, notice of the time,
place and subject matter of which, sufficient for identification, shall be
given by publishing in a newspaper of general circulation in the Town
once in each of two successive weeks, the first publication to be not less
than 14 days prior to the date set for such hearing. No such amendment
shall be effective unless the proposed amendment has been approved
by the Town Council.
A.
Amendments shall also be subject to the procedures set out in Sections
10 and 11 of the Cape Cod Commission Act, Chapter 716 of the Acts
of 1989, as amended. Specifically, amendments must also be consistent
with the Fertilizer Management District of Critical Planning Concern
designation, Barnstable County Ordinance 13-07 and the Guidelines for
Implementing Regulations set out therein, including the requirement
for consistency with the BMP.
B.
§ 78-7 BARNSTABLE CODE § 80-2
80:106
access as invitees or licensees, shall, when directed by the Town Manager,
establish a fire lane.
§ 80-3. Marking, size and location.
Said fire lane shall be marked by yellow lines, at least four inches wide on
a diagonal from the point of origin to the curb or sidewalk. The fire lane
shall not be less than eight feet wide from the curb, or in the case of a
building with no curb or sidewalk less than 12 feet wide from the edge of
said building. The legend (Fire Lane) shall be included within the printed
area.
§ 80-4. Signs.
Signs with the legend "No Parking - Fire Lane - Town Zone" shall be erected
no more than 50 feet nor less than 25 feet apart along the length of the fire
lane. Signs shall be at least 12 inches wide by 16 inches high, and shall be
securely mounted at least six feet but not more than eight feet above grade.
§ 80-5. Enforcement.
§ 80-6. Violations and penalties.
Any such person or body who fails to establish such fire lane when directed
to by the Town Manager shall be punished by a fine of not more than
$300, and this chapter may be enforced by members of the Barnstable
Police Department. Each day that such violation continues shall constitute
a separate offense.
Any vehicle or object obstructing or blocking any fire lane or private
way may be removed or towed at the direction of the Chief of Police or
such Sergeants or other officers of high rank in the Police Department
as he may from time to designate. Liability may be imposed for the
reasonable cost of such removal and for the storage charges, if any,
resulting therefrom, upon the owner of such vehicle; provided,
however, that the liability also imposed for removal shall not exceed
that as provided for in Chapter 40, § 22D of the General Laws. Neither
the removal nor storage of a vehicle under the provisions of this section
shall be deemed to be services rendered or work performed by the
Town of Barnstable or the Police Department.
A.
Enforcement of parking violations in such established fire lanes shall
be by members of the Barnstable Police Department in accordance with
the Town of Barnstable Traffic Regulations, Chapter 90, § 20A 1/2 of the
General Laws and this chapter.
B.
§ 80-2 FIRE LANES § 80-6
80:107
Chapter 86
FUNDS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Handicapped parking — See Ch. 104.
§ 80-6 BARNSTABLE CODE § 80-6
80:108
ARTICLE I
Reversion of Appropriations to General Fund
[Adopted 11-7-1981, approved 2-23-1982 (Art. XIV of Ch. II of the
General Ordinances as updated through 7-7-2003)]
§ 86-1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following words shall have the following
meanings:
GENERAL APPROPRIATION — Any appropriation made by the Town
Council which is not a specific appropriation within the meaning of this
article.
SPECIFIC APPROPRIATION — An appropriation made by the Town Council
which is described within the vote making the appropriation as being
"specific," and is otherwise a specific appropriation under the law.
§ 86-2. Reversion of general appropriations to the general fund.
General appropriations made by the Town Council shall continue to revert
to the general fund at the close of the fiscal year for which they are made,
as provided by law.
§ 86-3. Reversion of specific appropriations to the general fund.
Unless otherwise provided in a vote of the Town Council making a specific
appropriation, or unless a specific appropriation has been encumbered by
contractual obligations, specific appropriations shall have a normal life of
three years from the commencement of the fiscal year for which it was
approved. At the end of the third fiscal year, any funds remaining in the
appropriation shall revert to the general fund. A vote making a specific
appropriation may provide that the appropriation shall revert to the general
fund at the end of any fiscal year.
§ 86-4. Extension of date.12
The Town may, at any time by appropriate action by the Town Council,
extend the date on which a specific appropriation would otherwise revert to
the general fund.
§ 86-5. Rights of creditors.
Nothing in this article shall be construed to affect the right of any creditor
of the Town, regardless of the reversion of any appropriation to the general
fund.
12.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 86-1 FIRE LANES § 86-5
80:109

ARTICLE II
Enterprise Funds
[Adopted 7-15-1993 by Order No. 93-129 (Art. XVIII-B of Ch. II of
the General Ordinances as updated through 7-7-2003)]
§ 86-6. Designation of certain facilities as enterprises.
The Town accepts the provisions of § 53F 1/2 of Chapter 44 of the MGL,
authorizing the establishment of Enterprise Funds and hereby designates:
The Recreation Department's Olde Barnstable Fairgrounds Municipal
Golf Course facility and its operation as an enterprise thereunder;
A.
The Barnstable Municipal Airport and its operation as an enterprise
thereunder;
B.
The Public Works Department Solid Waste Division, Flint Street,
Marstons Mills Municipal Solid Waste Facility and its operation as an
enterprise thereunder; and
C.
The Public Works Department Water Pollution Control Division
facilities, including mains and pumping stations and their operation, as
an enterprise thereunder.
D.
The Public Works Department Water Supply Division facilities,
including wells and well fields, storage tanks, mains and pumping
stations and their operation, as an enterprise thereunder. [Added
5-26-2005 by Order No. 2005-099]
E.
The Department of Community Services Marine and Environmental
Affairs Division Marina facilities as an enterprise thereunder. [Added
5-26-2005 by Order No. 2005-099]
F.
The Department of Community Services Marine and Environmental
Affairs Division Sandy Neck area and facilities as an enterprise
thereunder. [Added 5-26-2005 by Order No. 2005-099]
G.
The Department of Community Services Hyannis Youth and Community
Center facility, as an enterprise thereunder. [Added 5-21-2009 by
Order No. 2009-106]
H.
§ 86-6 FIRE LANES § 86-6
80:111

ARTICLE III
Revolving Funds
[Adopted 7-20-2000 by Order No. 2000-144 (Art. XVIII-A of Ch. II of
the General Ordinances as updated through 7-7-2003)]
§ 86-7. Establishment. [Amended 6-2-2011 by Order No. 2011-134]
The Town hereby establishes revolving funds, pursuant to Chapter 44, § 53
E 1/2 of the General Laws, within the special revenue accounts of the Town
of Barnstable which shall be known as the:
§ 86-8. Operation. [Amended 6-2-2011 by Order No. 2011-134;
5-4-2017 by Order No. 2017-142[
The Senior Services Division, the Recreation Division and the Natural
Resources Division of the Community Services Department, the Building
Services Division and Consumer Affairs Division of the Regulatory Services
Department, the Information Systems Division of the Administrative
Services Department, the Police Department and the Planning and
Development Department are hereby authorized to operate said funds in the
following manner:
Classroom Education Fund, Senior Services Division, Community
Services Department.
A.
Adult Social Day Fund, Senior Services Division, Community Services
Department.
B.
Recreation Program Fund, Recreation Division, Community Services
Department.
C.
Shellfish Propagation Fund, Natural Resources Division, Community
Services Department.
D.
Building Inspections Fund, Building Services Division, Regulatory
Services Department.
E.
Consumer Protection Fund, Consumer Affairs Division, Regulatory
Services Department.
F.
Geographical Information Systems Fund, Information Systems Division,
Administrative Services Department.
G.
H. Police Training Fund, Police Department.
Arts and Culture Program Fund, Planning and Development
Department. [Amended 5-4-2017 by Order No. 2017-142]
I.
The Town Accountant shall account for all funds separately from all
other monies of the Town and to which shall be credited only the
departmental receipts received in connection with the programs
supported by such revolving fund. Receipts credited to each of these
revolving funds shall mean the following:
A.
§ 86-7 FIRE LANES § 86-8
80:113
For the Classroom Education Fund, Adult Social Day Fund and the
Recreation Program Fund: program registration fees to participate
in these programs.
(1)
For the Shellfish Propagation Fund: fees generated from the sale of
commercial and recreational shellfish permits.
(2)
For the Building Inspections Fund: fees generated from permits
issued on municipal projects over $500,000 and private projects
over $3,000,000.
(3)
For Consumer Protection Fund: fees generated for services
performed under this program.
(4)
For the Geographical Information Systems Fund: fees generated
for the production of GIS maps and reports.
(5)
For the Police Training Fund: fees generated for providing police
training to police of other towns.
(6)
For the Arts and Culture Program Fund: lease payments received
from the rental of artist shanties gifts or contributions received
for the support or promotion of arts and culture programs and
any revenue generated from Town-sponsored arts and culture
programming.
(7)
Expenditures may be made from such revolving funds without further
appropriation, subject to the provisions of this article; provided,
however, that expenditures shall not be made or liabilities incurred
from any of the revolving funds in excess of the balance of the fund
nor in excess of the total authorized expenditures from such fund.
Expenditures from such revolving funds shall be at the approval of the
Town Manager.
B.
Interest earned on any revolving fund balance shall be treated as
general fund revenue of the Town.
C.
Expenditures from said fund shall not be made for the purpose of
paying any wages or salaries for full-time employees unless the fringe
benefits associated with such wages or salaries are also charged to the
fund. Subject to the foregoing, the funds may be expended for payment
of teachers, recreational instructors, police training instructors,
shellfish propagation officers, building inspectors, weights and
measures inspectors, and other expenses of programs providing
classroom education to participating senior citizens, programs
providing recreational activities to participating residents of the Town,
shellfish seed stock and related shellfish propagation equipment,
professional building inspection services, weights and measures
enforcement, production of GIS reports and police training and
expenses related to the promotion of arts and culture programs.
D.
§ 86-8 BARNSTABLE CODE § 86-9
80:114
§ 86-9. Annual authorization.
Annually, at the time the Town budget is submitted to the Town Council, the
Town Manager shall submit an order to the Town Council authorizing the
revolving funds set forth in § 86-7. The order shall contain the following:
§ 86-10. Annual report.
At the end of each fiscal year, the Finance Director shall report to the Town
Manager the total amount of receipts and expenditures of each revolving
fund for the prior fiscal year. The program directors shall report to the
Town Manager the programs, services and participants served by each of
the programs. The Town Manager shall forthwith cause a report to be made
to the Town Council, together with such other information, as the Town
Council shall require.
§ 86-11. Fiscal year close-out.
At the close of a fiscal year in which a revolving fund is not reauthorized
for the following year, or in which the Town changes the purposes for which
money in a revolving fund may be spent in the following year, the balance in
the fund at the end of the fiscal year shall revert to surplus revenue unless
the Town Council, upon the recommendation for a transfer from the Town
Manager, votes to transfer such balance to another revolving fund.
The programs and purposes for which the revolving fund may be
expended;
A.
B. The department or officer authorized to expend from such fund;
The departmental receipts which shall be credited to the revolving
fund; and
C.
A limit on the total which may be expended from such fund in the
ensuing year, subject further to limitations that may be established
annually within the order.
D.
§ 86-9 FIRE LANES § 86-11
80:115

ARTICLE IV
Handicap Parking Fund
[Adopted 5-6-2004 by Order No. 2004-078 (Art. LVII of Ch. III of the
General Ordinances as updated through 7-7-2003)]
§ 86-12. Establishment; purpose; amount of transfer.
There is hereby established a Handicap Parking Fund within the Town, the
purpose of which shall be to allocate funds received from fines assessed
for violations of handicap parking regulations. Funds transferred to the
Handicap Parking Fund shall not exceed $50 per citation collected.
§ 86-13. Deposit in separate account; expenditures.
Funds so received shall be deposited by the Town Treasurer in a separate
account and shall be used solely for the benefit of persons with disabilities.
Said account shall be established and shall be kept separate from all other
accounts. Expenditures from said account shall be made by the Town
Manager upon the recommendation of the Disability Commission for the
purpose of effecting accessibility improvements within the Town of
Barnstable and for administrative expenses of the Barnstable Disability
Commission in an amount not to exceed a total of $3,000 in any one fiscal
year.
§ 86-14. Deposit of excess funds to general fund.
All funds collected in excess of $50 per citation issued shall be deposited to
the general fund to help defray the cost of parking enforcement, collection,
printing and processing activities.
§ 86-15. Annual report.
The Town Accountant shall annually submit a report to the Town Manager
and Town Council for review, and a copy of said report shall be forwarded
to the Department of Revenue Bureau of Accounts.
§ 86-12 FIRE LANES § 86-15
80:117
Chapter 89
GAMBLING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Noncriminal disposition — See Ch. 1, Art. I. Raffles and bazaars — See Ch. 166.
§ 89-1. Definitions.
The words "house," "building" and "place" used severally or together in
this chapter shall mean and include a ship or vessel when it is within the
territorial limits of the Town.
§ 89-2. Keeping or frequenting gaming houses prohibited;
violations and penalties.
Whoever keeps or assists in keeping a common gaming house, or building or
place occupied, used or kept for the purposes described in § 23 of Chapter
271 of the General Laws, or is found playing or present as provided in
said section, or commonly keeps or suffers to be kept, in a building or
place actually used and occupied by him, tables or other apparatus for the
purpose of playing at an unlawful game or sport for money or any other
valuable thing, shall be punished by a fine of not more than $300.
Chapter 93
GARAGE AND BARN SALES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Noncriminal disposition — See Ch. 1, Art. I. Raffles and bazaars — See Ch. 166.
§ 93-1. Definitions.
Garage and/or barn sales are defined as the sale, or offering for sale, of
10 or more items of personal property at any one residential premises at
any one time, excluding such sales as may be conducted by a bona fide
charitable organization, religious or fraternal society or other tax exempt
organization.
§ 93-2. Limits on number, frequency and length of sales.
Unless specific written authorization is given by the Town Manager, not
more than two such sales shall be held on any one residential premises
in each calendar year nor more than one such sale in a period of three
§ 86-15 BARNSTABLE CODE § 93-2
89:118
consecutive months, and any such sale shall not continue for more than two
consecutive days.
§ 93-3. Written permission required.
As a condition precedent to any such sale, written permission for the
holding of said sale must be secured from the Town Manager at least three
days prior thereto.
§ 93-4. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be punished
by a fine not exceeding $50 for each offense. Each day that a violation
hereof exists will be deemed a separate offense.
Chapter 96
GAS PIPING AND APPLIANCES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Schedule of Fees — See Ch. 76, Art. I.
§ 96-1. Applicability of state regulations.
Whoever proposes to place or install or alter gas appliances or gas piping
or appurtenances thereto shall be subject to the rules and regulations
as specified in the Commonwealth of Massachusetts Fuel Gas Code
promulgated in accordance with the provisions of M.G.L. Chapter 25, § 12H,
and any amendments thereto.
§ 96-2. Appointment of Gas Inspector; term.
Said Code and any penalties thereunder shall be administered and enforced
by the Gas Inspector of the Town of Barnstable who shall be appointed by
the Town Manager annually in June, to hold office from the first of July
following for the term of one year or until his successor has been appointed
and qualified.
§ 96-3. Permit required; fees. [Amended 11-3-1979, approved
2-26-1980; 5-3-1986, approved 6-20-1986; 11-5-1988, approved
1-3-1989]
No placement or alteration as described under § 96-1 shall be made except
upon application for and issuance of an appropriate permit by the Gas
Inspector at a fee as provided in Chapter 76, Fees, Article II, Schedule
of Fees. All reinspections shall be subject to a fee for each inspection as
provided in the Schedule of Fees.
§ 93-2 GAS PIPING AND APPLIANCES § 96-3
96:119
Chapter 100
HANDBILLS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Noncriminal disposition — See Ch. 1, Art. I.
§ 96-3 BARNSTABLE CODE § 96-3
100:120
ARTICLE I
Distribution of Handbills
[Adopted 6-25-1963, approved 7-22-1963 (Art. XIX of Ch. III of the
General Ordinances as updated through 7-7-2003)]
§ 100-1. Distribution in public places prohibited.
The distribution of commercial advertising on handbills, cards, signs or in
any other form, by placing the same on or in vehicles which are parked
on the public ways, in public places, or other areas open to the public, is
prohibited.
§ 100-2. Violations and penalties. [Added 5-18-1976, approved
9-13-1976]
Any person violating the provisions of this article shall be punished by a fine
not to exceed $50.
§ 100-1 HANDBILLS § 100-2
100:121

ARTICLE II
Commercial Handbills
[Adopted 1984 Fall ATM, approved 2-28-1985 (Art. XLIV of Ch. III of
the General Ordinances as updated through 7-7-2003)]
§ 100-3. Distribution restricted.
No person shall distribute any commercial handbill or other printed matter
whose distribution is not protected by the Constitution of the United States
or of the commonwealth on any sidewalk or public way within the town.
§ 100-4. Violations and penalties.
Whoever violates the provisions of this article shall be fined not more than
$300.
§ 100-3 HANDBILLS § 100-4
100:123
Chapter 104
HANDICAPPED PARKING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Handicapped parking fines — See Ch. 1, Art.
II.
Handicapped Parking Fund — See Ch. 86, Art.
IV.
§ 104-1. Parking reserved for those with special license plates only.
No person shall park a motor vehicle, motorcycle or like means of
transportation in a designated parking space that is reserved for vehicles
owned and operated by disabled veterans or by handicapped persons unless
said vehicle bears the distinctive license plates authorized by § 2 of Chapter
90 of the General Laws.
§ 104-2. Number of handicapped spaces required for certain uses.
Any person or body that has lawful control of a public or private way or of
improved or enclosed property used as off-street parking areas for business,
shopping malls, theaters, auditoriums, sporting or recreational facilities,
cultural centers, residential dwellings, or for any other place where the
public has right-of-access as invitees or licensees shall be required to
reserve parking spaces in said off-street parking areas for any vehicle
owned and operated by a disabled veteran or handicapped person whose
vehicle bears the distinguishing license plate authorized by § 2 of Chapter
90, according to the following formula: If the number of parking spaces in
any such area is:
A. More than 15 but not more than 25: one parking space;
More than 25 but not more than 40: 5% of the spaces but not less than
two;
B.
More than 40 but not more than 100: 4% of such spaces but not less
than three;
C.
More than 100 but not more than 200: 3% of such spaces but not less
than four;
D.
More than 200 but not more than 500:, 2% of such spaces but not less
than six;
E.
More than 500 but not more than 1,000: 1 1/2% of such spaces but not
less than 10;
F.
More than 1,000 but not more than 2,000: 1% of such spaces but not
less than 15;
G.
§ 100-4 BARNSTABLE CODE § 104-2
104:124
§ 104-3. Off-street parking areas associated with condominiums.
[Added 11-2-1985, approved 12-6-1985]
For the purposes of this chapter, off-street parking areas associated with
residential condominiums shall not be deemed to be open to and used by the
public as licensees or invitees unless there by 15 or more parking spaces
available per residential unit.
§ 104-4. Sign requirements for and location of handicapped parking
spaces.
Each parking space designated as reserved under the provisions of § 104-2
of this chapter shall be identified by a permanently installed above-grade
sign at least six feet above ground level with white lettering against a blue
background and shall bear the words "HANDICAPPED PARKING. SPECIAL
PLATE REQUIRED. UNAUTHORIZED PARKING SUBJECT TO FINE AND
TOWING AT OWNER'S EXPENSE," and must also contain the international
symbol of accessibility which is a person in a wheel chair. Such parking
spaces shall be adjacent to curb ramps or other methods permitting
sidewalk access to a handicapped person, shall be 12 feet wide or have
two eight-foot wide areas with four feet of cross hatch between them and
contain the international symbol of accessibility on their surface.
§ 104-5. Unauthorized vehicles in handicapped spaces prohibited.
Unauthorized vehicles shall be prohibited from parking within parking
spaces designated for use by disabled veterans or handicapped persons as
authorized by §§ 104-1 through 104-4 of this chapter or parking in such a
manner as to obstruct such parking spaces or curb ramps designated for
use by handicapped persons as a means of egress to a street or public way.
§ 104-6. Violations and penalties.
More than 2,000 but less than 5,000: 3/4 of 1% of such spaces but not
less than 20; and
H.
I. More than 5,000: 1/2 of 1% of such spaces but not less than 30.
The penalty for parking in violation of this chapter shall be $25 and/or
the vehicle may be removed at the owner's expense according to the
provisions of § 120D of Chapter 266 of the General Laws and may be
enforced by the Police Department.
A.
The penalty for failure to establish and maintain the parking spaces and
signs required by §§ 104-1 through 104-4 of this chapter shall be $200
for each day such failure continues and may be enforced by the Building
Commissioner.
B.
§ 104-2 HANDICAPPED PARKING § 104-6
104:125
Chapter 108
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Noncriminal disposition — See Ch. 1, Art. I.
Fee for license to store hazardous
materials — See Ch. 76, Art. II.
Fuel and chemical storage systems — See Ch.
326.
On-site sewage disposal systems — See Ch.
360.
Toxic and hazardous materials — See Ch. 381.
Wells — See Ch. 397.
§ 108-1. Findings.
Exposure to hazardous substances can cause cancer, genetic mutation,
birth defects, miscarriages, lung, liver, and kidney damage, and death.
A.
Environmental contamination can bankrupt site owners, lower or
destroy land values, drive out residents and industry, depress local
economies, and endanger public health.
B.
Most hazardous substances do not readily decompose into harmless
components. They instead remain in highly dangerous forms and
penetrate by movement through land and water into and throughout
the environment.
C.
Some hazardous substances are considered explosive and/or extremely
hazardous and toxic. These substances have caused death and serious
injuries to Fire Department personnel. A comprehensive database
containing the types and amounts of toxic or hazardous materials
stored or handled within buildings within the Town should be formed in
order to provide essential information to Fire Department personnel.
D.
Barnstable's groundwater is the sole source of its existing and future
drinking water supply. When sufficient groundwater exists to saturate
a permeable geologic formation so as to yield significant quantities of
water through wells or springs, it is known as an aquifer.
E.
On Cape Cod, some aquifers may be integral with the surface waters,
lakes, streams and coastal estuaries which constitute significant
recreational and economic resources of the Town. These resources are
used for swimming and other water-related recreation, shellfishing and
fishing.
F.
Accidental spills and discharges of petroleum products and other toxic
and hazardous materials onto the ground and surface waters have
repeatedly threatened the quality of such groundwater supplies and
related water resources on Cape Cod and other Massachusetts towns,
G.
§ 104-6 BARNSTABLE CODE § 108-1
108:126
§ 108-2. Authority.
The Town of Barnstable adopts the following measures under its home rule
powers, its police powers to protect the public health and welfare, and its
authorization under M.G.L. Chapter 40, § 21.
§ 108-3. Definitions.
posing substantial public health and safety hazards and threatening
economic losses to the affected communities.
Unless stricter preventive measures are adopted to manage the
storage, use, and generation of toxic and hazardous materials and
to prohibit the release of these materials within the Town, further
releases of such materials to the aquifer will predictably occur, and
with greater frequency and degree of hazard by reason of increasing
construction, commercial and industrial development, population, and
vehicular traffic in the Town of Barnstable and on Cape Cod.
H.
The foregoing conclusions are well known and have been confirmed by
findings set forth by the Barnstable County Health and Environmental
Department, the Cape Cod Commission, the Massachusetts Department
of Environmental Protection, the Occupational Safety and Health
Administration (OSHA), and the Environmental Protection Agency
(EPA).
I.
Recent revisions to the Massachusetts Drinking Water Regulations, 310
CMR 22.00, created the need for this chapter to be amended in order
to remove potential conflicts between this chapter and 310 CMR 22.00.
J.
Enforcement agencies.
BOARD OF HEALTH — A regulatory committee of the Town. It consists
of three members, one of whom is a physician. The members are
appointed by the Town Council of the Town of Barnstable.
BUILDING COMMISSIONER — The designated supervisor and
administrator of the Town of Barnstable Building Department. The
Building Commissioner is appointed by the Town Manager.
FIRE DEPARTMENT — The appropriate Town of Barnstable Fire
District's Fire Chief and/or that Fire Chief's designee(s).
HEALTH DEPARTMENT — The Director of Public Health, who is the
designated agent of the Board of Health, and/or the Director of Public
Health's designee(s). The Health Department provides administrative
support to the Board of Health.
A.
Other terms.
ACUTELY HAZARDOUS MATERIAL — A material which is extremely
toxic or reactive. For the purposes of this chapter, any acutely
hazardous waste listed within 310 CMR 30.136 of the Massachusetts
Department of Environmental Protection Hazardous Waste
B.
§ 108-1 HAZARDOUS MATERIALS § 108-3
108:127
Regulations, and those wastes listed within 310 CMR 30.131 with EPA
Hazardous Waste Nos. F020, F021, F022, F023, F026, F027, and F028
are considered as acutely hazardous materials.
HANDLE — To use, to deal with, act on, or dispose of.
HAZARDOUS MATERIAL — One or more of the following:
MATERIAL SAFETY DATA SHEET (MSDS) — The form containing data
regarding physical characteristics, flammability, reactivity, toxicity, and
the health and safety hazards of specific chemicals, as well as
information relative to procedures recommended for spills and leaks of
specific chemicals and special precautions to be taken during handling
of specific chemicals.
OPERATOR — The person who has the effective control of a business
operation, or governmental agency.
OWNER — The person who has legal ownership of a site. For the
purpose of this regulation, the Health Department shall be entitled to
rely on the most current list of owners in the records of the Town Board
of Assessors as providing sufficient evidence of ownership under this
chapter.
A product or waste or combination of substances which, because
of quantity, concentration or physical or chemical or infectious
characteristics, poses a present or potential hazard to human
health, safety, or welfare or the environment when improperly
treated, stored, transported, used, or disposed of or otherwise
managed.
(1)
Any material regulated under Sections 310 CMR 30.122, 310 CMR
30.123, 310 CMR 30.124, 310 CMR 30.125, 310 CMR 30.131
(except for those listed with EPA Hazardous Waste Nos. F020,
F021, F022, F023, F026, F027, F028 which are considered as
acutely hazardous materials), 310 CMR 30.132, and 310 CMR
30.160 of the Massachusetts Department of Environmental
Protection Hazardous Waste Regulations, et seq., as these statutes
may be amended. A general listing of these materials and
quantities is available at the Health Department office.
(2)
Any material, waste, product, or substance which has one or more
of the following characteristics:
(a) Ignitable: easily catches fire, flash point of less than 140° F.;
Corrosive: easily corrodes certain materials, very acidic or
alkaline, the pH is less than or equal to 2.0 or greater than or
equal to 12.5;
(b)
Reactive: explosive, produces toxic gases when mixed with
water or acid;
(c)
(d) Toxic: poisonous.
(3)
§ 108-3 BARNSTABLE CODE § 108-3
108:128
§ 108-4. Inventory and registration.
RELEASE — The accidental or intentional spilling, leaking, pumping,
discharging, pouring, emitting, emptying or dumping of toxic or
hazardous material upon or into any land, air, or waters of the Town
of Barnstable. Release includes, without limitations, leakage of such
materials from failed or discarded containers or storage systems, and
disposal of such materials into any sewage disposal system, dry well,
catch basin, unapproved hazardous waste landfill, or any other
discharge of toxic or hazardous materials into the environment. The
term "release" as used and applied in this chapter does not include the
following:
SITE — Any real estate, personal property, facility, building, structure,
installation, equipment, pipe or pipeline including any pipe into a storm
drain, sewer or treatment works, well, pit, pond, lagoon, impoundment,
ditch, tank, landfill, storage container, or any other place or area to,
from or at which toxic or hazardous materials have been stored or
discharged.
STORE — The containment of substances or materials in such a manner
as not to constitute disposal or use of such substances or materials.
Notwithstanding the above, such terms shall not include the
maintaining of hazardous materials which are in transit or which are
maintained in a fixed facility for a period of less than 30 days during the
course of transportation.
Proper disposal of any material in a sanitary or industrial landfill
that has received and maintained all necessary legal approvals for
that purpose;
(1)
Application of fertilizers and pesticides in accordance with label
recommendations and with regulations of the Massachusetts
Pesticide Control Board;
(2)
Application of road salts in conformation with the Snow and Ice
Control Program of the Massachusetts Highway Department and/
or the Town of Barnstable Highway Division.
(3)
Disposal of sanitary sewage to subsurface sewage disposal systems
as defined and permitted by Title 5 of the Massachusetts
Environmental Code and the Board of Health regulations.
(4)
Disposal of sanitary sewage to the Town of Barnstable wastewater
treatment plant and to other wastewater treatment facilities as
defined and permitted by the Massachusetts Department of
Environmental Protection.
(5)
No owner of a business, home occupation, industry, or operator of a
governmental agency shall handle or store acutely hazardous materials
and/or hazardous materials in the Town of Barnstable unless he/she
is the holder of a registration. Such registration shall include an
A.
§ 108-3 HAZARDOUS MATERIALS § 108-4
108:129
§ 108-5. Storage controls.
inventory, the location of the site, the name of the operator, and the
name of the owner. The inventory shall include the proposed and/or
existing quantities of all acutely hazardous materials and hazardous
materials handled or stored on site on the form provided by the Health
Department.
The owner shall describe the storage location of the material safety
data sheets on the registration form provided. The material safety data
sheets shall be made available upon request of the Health Department
and/or the Fire Department.
B.
There are no minimum quantities that exempt an owner from this
section.
C.
New owners of businesses, home occupations, or industrial
establishments who have not previously obtained a registration in
accordance with this section shall, if they handle or store acutely
hazardous materials and/or hazardous materials, obtain a registration
prior to handling or storage at a building or structure and prior to
commencing business.
D.
The registration shall be revised or renewed if there is a change in the
inventory, the site, the operator, or the owner.
E.
All acutely hazardous materials and/or hazardous materials shall be
stored indoors, unless in product-tight containers which are protected
from the elements, leakage, accidental damage, and vandalism. Liquid
hazardous materials other than gasoline, which are stored outside,
shall be stored above ground in a covered container within a
containment area designed to contain a minimum of 110% of the
volume of all materials to be stored. For the purposes of this subsection,
fertilizer shall be considered as hazardous materials.
A.
Containers of acutely hazardous materials and/or hazardous materials
shall be stored on an impervious, chemical-resistant surface compatible
with the material being stored. Provisions shall be made to contain the
product in the case of an accidental release.
B.
Wastes containing acutely hazardous materials and/or hazardous
materials shall be held on the premises in product-tight containers and
shall be removed and disposed of in accordance with the Massachusetts
Hazardous Waste Management Act, Ch. 704 of the Acts of 1979.13
C.
Road salts and other chemicals used for ice and snow removal shall
be contained in a structure that provides protection from the elements.
The structure shall be constructed in such a way to prevent a release
and to prevent leachate from contaminating the groundwater and
surface waters.
D.
13.Editor's Note: See MGL C. 21C, § 1 et seq.
§ 108-4 BARNSTABLE CODE § 108-5
108:130
§ 108-6. License and contingency plan.
Other containers/containment areas may be required as specified or as
determined by the Director of Public Health.
E.
The Board of Health shall adopt regulations from time to time
specifying the hazardous materials and acutely hazardous materials
which shall be regulated by licensure, specifying the quantities of
such hazardous materials and acutely hazardous materials which shall
be regulated by licensure, and specifying the fees for such licenses.
The Board of Health may have reference to scientific literature,
publications, recommendations and regulations of federal, state, and
local regulatory agencies, the expertise and experience of public safety
agencies, especially and including Fire Departments. Such a
determination will be based upon the ignitability, corrosivity, reactivity,
or toxicity of the hazardous materials handled or stored, the amounts
of hazardous materials and acutely hazardous materials stored, and
the proposed storage location and handling location of the acutely
hazardous materials and hazardous materials.
A.
The Health Department shall enforce such Board of Health regulations.
The Health Department shall require, after reviewing the submitted
registration information set forth in § 108-4, an owner to obtain an
annual license.
B.
It shall be the responsibility of the owner and/or the operator to apply
annually for such license.
C.
New owners of businesses, home occupations, industrial
establishments or operators of governmental agencies who have not
previously obtained a license in accordance with this section may be
required upon registration to obtain a license prior to handling and/or
storage at a building or dwelling and prior to commencing business.
D.
The owner and/or operator shall submit a contingency plan prior to the
issuance of a license by the Health Department. A contingency plan
shall meet the requirements set forth below:
Submission of the names, addresses, and telephone numbers of
the owner, operator, and all other persons responsible for
implementation of the contingency plan in the absence of the
owner and/or operator.
(1)
A plan showing where and how all regulated substances shall be
stored as described within § 108-5 of this chapter such that the
method of containing any accidental release to ensure that all such
releases will be totally contained and prevented from reaching
any surface or ground waters or into any on-site sewage disposal
system, sewer system, catch basin, or dry well. This plan shall also
be posted in one of the following on-site locations: guard shack,
(2)
E.
§ 108-5 HAZARDOUS MATERIALS § 108-6
108:131
fire alarm box, sprinkler riser, other location acceptable to the Fire
Department. The location of the posting shall be specified.
The Health Department and/or the Fire Department may require
the owner to provide vacuum suction devices or absorbent
scavenger materials be present on site in sufficient magnitude so
as to control and collect the total quantity of regulated substances
present or may require such devices and materials to be readily
available and easily accessible from off-site sources consistent with
the contingency plan. Emergency containers shall be of such
capacity as to hold the total quantity of regulated substances plus
any absorbent material. A plan showing the location of all
emergency collection devices shall be provided if the provisions of
this section are required.
(3)
Proper and adequate maintenance of containment and emergency
equipment shall be required. Procedures shall be established for
inspections performed by the operator and/or the operator's
designee(s) once every three months and for the verification of
maintenance of containment and emergency equipment. Such
procedures shall be in writing, including a regular schedule of
maintenance. A log documenting any accidental spills, describing
how such spills were handled, describing inspection results, and
maintenance shall be kept at the site. Such logs and records shall
be available for inspection by the Health Department and/or the
Fire Department at all times.
(4)
The procedures which will be followed in the event of release so
as to control and collect all released material in such a manner as
to prevent it from reaching any surface or ground waters or into
any sewage disposal system, municipal sewer system, catch basin,
or dry well. Every operator having knowledge of a release or other
loss of acutely hazardous materials and/or hazardous materials
shall report the release or loss of same to the Health Department
and the Fire Department within one hour of detection. The operator
shall ensure the telephone number of the appropriate Fire
Department and of the Town of Barnstable Health Department
office shall be posted on or adjacent to a telephone located at the
site.
(5)
Prior to submission of the contingency plan to the Health Department,
approval of that plan must be obtained from the Fire Department.
F.
Upon receipt of the annual fee, completion of the annual application
form designated by the Health Department, upon receipt of a complete
inventory, and upon receipt of a satisfactory contingency plan, the
Director of Public Health shall issue said license to the operator and the
site. Said license shall expire on June 30 and shall be administratively
renewed annually upon application and payment of the annual fee.
G.
§ 108-6 BARNSTABLE CODE § 108-6
108:132
§ 108-7. Appeals.
Any person or persons upon whom any order has been served pursuant
to any section of this chapter may request a hearing before the Board
of Health by filing a written petition, provided that such petition shall be
filed within seven days after the day the order was served. Upon receipt
of a petition, the Board of Health shall in writing inform the petitioner
of the date, time, and place of the hearing and their right to inspect and
copy the Board of Health's file concerning the matter. The hearing shall
be commenced not later than 30 days after the date the order was served.
At the hearing, the petitioner and other affected parties shall be given an
opportunity to be heard, to present witnesses or documentary evidence,
and to show why an order should be modified or withdrawn, or why an
action by an inspector or other personnel of the Health Department should
be reconsidered, rescinded, or ordered. Failure to hold a hearing within
the time period specified herein shall not affect the validity of any order.
The Board of Health shall sustain, modify, or withdraw the order and shall
inform the petitioner in writing of its decision within not more than seven
days after the conclusion of the hearing.
§ 108-8. Handling or storage of additional hazardous materials.
The Director of Public Health may grant, suspend, modify, or revoke
such license for due cause or failure to comply with any section of
this chapter and/or failure to perform the conditions set forth in the
contingency plan.
H.
No person shall handle or store any hazardous materials and/or acutely
hazardous materials which were not listed on the submitted
registration and inventory until after the owner and/or the operator has
registered any additional hazardous materials as an amendment to the
inventory.
A.
An operator shall first receive the approval of the owner prior to
registering any additional hazardous materials with the Health
Department.
B.
The Health Department may require, after reviewing the submitted
amended inventory and other information, the operator and the owner
of a business, home occupation, or industry to obtain an annual license
if such additional hazardous materials places the applicant under the
current licensing regulations of the Board of Health.
C.
The Director of Public Health may grant, suspend, modify, or revoke
such license for due cause or failure to comply with any section of
this chapter and/or failure to perform the conditions set forth in the
contingency plan.
D.
§ 108-6 HAZARDOUS MATERIALS § 108-9
108:133
§ 108-9. Prohibitions.
The release of any hazardous materials and/or acutely hazardous materials
upon the ground, or into any surface or ground waters or into any sewage
disposal system, sewer system, catch basin, or dry well within the Town of
Barnstable, is prohibited.
§ 108-10. Licensure, registration, and inventory requirement
exemptions.
Licensure, registration, and reconciliation of inventory requirements shall
not apply to the following:
§ 108-11. 21E report information disclosure.
Fuel oil stored in conformance with Massachusetts fire prevention
regulations and regulations of the Barnstable Board of Health for the
purpose of heating buildings located on the site.
A.
Fuel stored in boats, airplanes, trucks, and other vehicles accessory to
a residential use.
B.
Noncommmercial buildings. The handling and storage of hazardous
materials at a residential dwelling in quantities which are associated
with reasonable household use. This exemption does not apply to a
professional or home occupation use as defined by §§ 240-12C(1) and
240-18 of Chapter 240, Zoning. In addition, this exemption does not
apply to hotels, motels, interval ownership facilities (time-shares),
guesthouses.
C.
The Health Department shall be the repository of information relating
to releases of hazardous materials. Any person possessing hazardous
material release information has an obligation to submit such
information to the Health Department. Every professional engineer
and/or other person conducting a 21E report analysis shall submit a
copy of the final report to the Health Department within 21 days of
completion of the report. Nothing shall contravene with § 12 of Chapter
21E of the Massachusetts General Laws.
A.
If a person believes that the information required by this chapter
involves the release of a trade secret, the person shall nevertheless
make the disclosure to the Director of Public Health and shall notify
the Director of Public Health in writing of that belief on the inventory
document.
B.
The Director of Public Health and the Fire Chief shall protect from
disclosure any trade secret designated as such by the operator.
C.
Upon receipt of a request for the release of information to the public
which includes information of which the operator has notified the
Director of Public Health is a trade secret, the Director of Public Health
shall notify the operator in writing of the request by certified mail,
D.
§ 108-9 BARNSTABLE CODE § 108-11
108:134
§ 108-12. Enforcement.
return receipt requested. The Director of Public Health shall release
the information to the public within 10 days of receipt of a written
request, but no earlier than three days after the date of mailing the
notice of the request for information, unless, prior to the expiration of
the ten-day period, the operator files an action in an appropriate court
for a declaratory judgment that the information is subject to protection
or for an injunction prohibiting disclosure of the information to the
public and promptly notifies the Director of Public Health of that action.
Any information which is confidential pursuant to this and/or § 108-4
shall not be disclosed to anyone except the following:
An officer or employee of the Town, county, state, or the United
States, in connection with the official duties of that officer or
employee under any law for the protection of health, or to a
contractor with the Town and their employees if, in the opinion of
the Director of Public Health, disclosure is necessary and required
for the satisfactory performance of a contract, for performance
of work, or to protect the health and safety of the employees of
the contractor. Fire and emergency rescue personnel and Health
Department personnel operating within the jurisdiction of the Town
shall be considered employees of the Town, as the case may be.
(1)
Any licensed physician where the physician certifies in writing to
the Health Department that the information is necessary to the
medical treatment of the physician's patient.
(2)
E.
The provisions of this chapter shall be enforced by the Health
Department. The Health Department may, according to law, enter upon
any premises at any reasonable time to inspect for compliance.
A.
Upon request of the Health Department, the owner, individual identified
on a registration or license application, or operator of any premises at
which toxic or hazardous materials are used or stored shall furnish all
information required to monitor compliance with this chapter. A sample
of wastewater disposed to on-site septic systems, dry wells or sewage
treatment systems may be required by the Health Department at the
operator's expense.
B.
All records pertaining to storage, removal and disposal of toxic or
hazardous wastes shall be retained for no less than five years by the
registration holder or license holder, and shall be made available for
review by the Health Department upon request.
C.
The Building Commissioner of the Town of Barnstable shall condition
issuance of building and occupancy permits upon conformity with the
requirements of this chapter respecting any hazardous materials and/
or acutely hazardous materials to be used in the course of such
construction or occupancy.
D.
§ 108-11 HAZARDOUS MATERIALS § 108-13
108:135
§ 108-13. Notice of violation.
Written notice of any violation of this chapter shall be given by the Health
Department, specifying the nature of the violation; any corrective measures
that must be undertaken, including containment and cleanup of discharged
materials; any preventive measures required for avoiding future violations;
and a time for compliance. Requirements specified in such notice shall be
reasonable in relation to the public health hazard involved and the difficulty
of compliance. The cost of containment and cleanup shall be borne by the
owner and operator of the premises.
§ 108-14. Violations and penalties.
§ 108-15. Severability.
Each provision of this chapter shall be construed as separate, to the end
that if any part of it shall be held invalid for any reason, the remainder shall
continue in full force and effect.
Chapter 112
HISTORIC PROPERTIES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Main Street in Hyannis and Osterville — See
Ch. 141, Art. I.
Zoning — See Ch. 240.
Any person who shall violate any section of this chapter for which
penalty is not otherwise provided in any of the General Laws shall upon
conviction be fined $300.
A.
Any person who shall fail to comply with any order issued pursuant
to the sections of this chapter shall, upon conviction, be fined $300.
Each day's failure to comply with an order shall constitute a separate
violation.
B.
In the alternative to criminal prosecution, the Health Department may
elect to utilize the noncriminal disposition procedure set forth in MGL
C. 40, § 21d. Noncriminal ticket citation for any violation of any section
of this chapter shall be in the amount of $75 for the first violation and
$25 for each additional violation. Each day's failure to comply with an
order shall constitute a separate violation.
C.
Further, the Health Department, after notice to and after a public
hearing thereon, may suspend, revoke, or modify any license issued
hereunder for cause shown.
D.
§ 108-13 BARNSTABLE CODE § 108-15
108:136
ARTICLE I
Protection of Historic Properties
[Adopted 11-5-1988, approved 1-6-1989; amended 12-1-1994 by
Order No. 95-061 (Art. XLIX of Ch. III of the General Ordinances as
updated through 7-7-2003)]
§ 112-1. Intent and scope.
This article is enacted to promote the public welfare and safeguard the
Town's historical, cultural and architectural heritage by protecting
historical resources that make the Town a more interesting, attractive and
desirable place in which to live. This article aims to protect and preserve
historic properties within the Town by encouraging their owners to seek
alternatives to their demolition and by providing the Town an opportunity to
work with owners of historic properties in identifying alternatives to their
demolition.
§ 112-2. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following words and terms, unless the context
required otherwise, shall have the following meanings:
BUILDING — Any combination of materials forming a shelter for persons,
animals or property.
COMMISSION — The Barnstable Historical Commission.
DEMOLITION — Any act of destroying, eliminating, pulling down, razing or
removing a building or any portion thereof, or starting the work of any such
act with the intention of completing the same.
PERSON — Any natural person, firm, partnership, association or
corporation.
SIGNIFICANT BUILDING — Any building or portion thereof, which is not
within a regional historic district or a local historic district subject to
regulation under provisions MGL c. 40C but which has been listed or is
the subject of a pending application for listing on the National Register
of Historic Places, or has been listed on the Massachusetts Register of
Historic Places, or is over 75 years of age and which is determined by the
Commission to be a significant building as provided by § 112-3D of this
article, either because:
PREFERABLY-PRESERVED SIGNIFICANT BUILDING — Any significant
building as to which the Commission determines, as provided in § 112-3G of
It is importantly associated with one or more historic persons or events,
or with the broad architectural, cultural, political, economic or social
history of the Town or the Commonwealth; or
A.
It is historically or architecturally important (in terms of period, style,
method of building construction, or association with a famous architect
or builder) either by itself or in the context of a group of buildings.
B.
§ 112-1 HAZARDOUS MATERIALS § 112-2
108:137
this article, that it is in the public interest to be preserved or rehabilitated
rather than to be demolished.
§ 112-3. Procedures. [Amended 1-3-2013 by Order No. 2013-057]
No permit for the demolition of a building which is a significant building
as defined in § 112-2 herein shall be issued other than in conformity
with the provisions of this article as well as in conformity with the
provisions of other laws applicable to the demolition of buildings and
the issuance of permits therefore generally.
A.
Any person who intends to file an application for a permit to demolish
a building which (1) Has been listed or is the subject of a pending
application for listing in the National Register of Historic Places or
is listed in the Massachusetts Register of Historic Places; or (2) Is
over 75 years of age shall first file a notice of intent to demolish a
significant building with the Town Clerk, and in addition, shall complete
the review process established in § 112-3A through I herein. The Town
Clerk shall forthwith transmit copies of each duly filed notice of intent
to the Commission and the Building Commissioner. At the time of filing
an application or request, the applicant shall pay a filing fee to be
determined annually by the Town Manager to cover costs and expenses
associated with this article.
B.
The Commission shall prepare and have available for distribution a
notice of intent to demolish a significant building, which shall contain
at least the following information:
(1) The applicant's name, address, if different in such property;
The owner's name and address, if different from that of the
applicant's;
(2)
(3) The address or location of such property;
(4) Assessor's map and parcel number;
(5) A brief description of such property; and
An explanation of the proposed use to be made of the site of such
property.
(6)
C.
Where an applicant has filed a notice of intent to demolish a building
that is over 75 years of age which neither has been listed nor is the
subject of a pending application for listing on the National Register
of Historic Places nor has been listed on the Massachusetts Register
of Historic Places, the Commission Chair or Chair's designee, in
consultation with the Planning and Development Department Staff,
shall, within 21 business days of the filing of the notice of intent,
file with the Town Clerk an initial determination, in writing, as to
whether or not the building is a significant building in accordance with
any criterion set forth in § 112-2, definition of "significant building,"
D.
§ 112-2 BARNSTABLE CODE § 112-3
108:138
Subsections A and B. A determination that a building is not a significant
building shall be transmitted by the Commission to the applicant, to the
Building Commissioner and to the Town Clerk, and the applicant shall
not be required to take any further steps prior to filing for a demolition
permit. This determination shall be in effect for 24 months from the
date of determination filing with the Town Clerk. After 24 months have
elapsed, a new determination shall be required. [Amended 5-4-2017
by Order No. 2017-142]
The Commission, unless the building is not significant, shall hold a
public hearing on each such notice of intent within 65 days after the
date the notice intent is filed with the Town Clerk, and shall give
notice thereof by publishing the date, time, place and purpose of the
hearing in a local newspaper at least 14 days before such hearing,
and also within seven days of said hearing, mailing a copy of said
notice to the applicant and to all property owners within 300 feet of
the subject property's boundaries. The Commission may require the
applicant to post the Commission's notice form on the subject building
and/or property. This form shall be visible from the nearest public way.
Within 21 days from the close of the public hearing, the Commission
shall file a written determination with the Town Clerk as to whether
the demolition proposed will be detrimental to the historical, cultural
or architectural heritage or resources of the Town of Barnstable.
E.
If after such hearing the Commission determined that the demolition
of the significant building would not be detrimental to the historical,
cultural or architectural heritage or resources of the Town, the
Commission shall so notify the applicant, the Building Commissioner
and the Town Clerk. Upon receipt of such notification, the Building
Commissioner may, subject to the requirements of the State Building
Code and any other applicable laws, ordinances, rules and regulations,
issue the demolition permit.
F.
If the Commission determines that the demolition of the significant
building would be detrimental to the historical, cultural or architectural
heritage or resources of the Town, such building shall be considered a
preferably preserved significant building.
G.
Upon a determination by the Commission that the significant building,
which is the subject of the application for a demolition permit, is a
preferably preserved significant building, the Commission shall notify
the applicant, the Building Commissioner, and the Town Clerk, and no
demolition permit may be issued until 18 months after the date of such
determination by the Commission is filed with the Town Clerk.
H.
Notwithstanding the preceding sentence, the Building Commissioner
may issue a demolition permit for a preferably preserved significant
building at any time after receipt of written advice from the
Commission to the effect that either:
I.
§ 112-3 HAZARDOUS MATERIALS § 112-3
108:139
§ 112-4. Emergency demolition.
Nothing in this article shall restrict the Building Commissioner from
ordering the demolition of a significant building determined by him to
present a clear and present danger to the safety of the public which only
demolition can prevent.
§ 112-5. Violations and penalties.
§ 112-6. Severability.
If any section, paragraph or part of this article be for any reason declared
invalid or unconstitutional by any court, every other section, paragraph and
part shall continue in full force and effect.
The Commission is satisfied that there is no reasonable likelihood
that either the owner or some other person or group is willing to
purchase, preserve, rehabilitate and restore such building; or
(1)
The Commission is satisfied that the owner has made continuing,
bona fide and reasonable efforts to locate a purchaser to preserve,
rehabilitate and restore the subject building, and that such efforts
have been unsuccessful.
(2)
The Commission's determination shall be in effect for 24 months from
the date of determination filing with the Town Clerk. After 24 months
have elapsed, a new determination shall be required.
J.
Whoever violates any provision of this article shall be penalized by a
fine of not more than $300. Each day any work continues in violation
hereof shall constitute a separate offense.
A.
The Commission and the Building Commissioner are each authorized
to institute any and all proceedings in law or equity as they deem
necessary to obtain compliance with the requirements of this article or
to prevent a violation thereof.
B.
No building permit shall be issued with respect to any premises upon
which a significant building has been voluntarily demolished in
violation of this article for a period of two years after the date of the
completion of such demolition. As used herein, "premises" includes
the parcel of land upon which the demolished significant building was
located and all adjoining parcels of land under common ownership or
control.
C.
Upon a determination by the Commission that a building is a
preferable-preserved significant building, the owner shall be
responsible for properly securing the building, if vacant, to the
satisfaction of the Building Commissioner. Should the owner fail so to
secure the building, the loss of such building through fire or other
causes shall be considered voluntary demolition for the purposes of
Subsection C.
D.
§ 112-3 BARNSTABLE CODE § 112-7
108:140
§ 112-7. Conflict.
No provision of this article shall be construed or applied so as to conflict
with Massachusetts General Laws, Chapter 143. In the event of an apparent
conflict, the provisions of General Laws, Chapter 143, shall prevail.
§ 112-7 HAZARDOUS MATERIALS § 112-7
108:141

ARTICLE II
Historic Landmarks
[Adopted 4-7-1994 (Art. LVI of Ch. III of the General Ordinances as
updated through 7-7-2003)]
§ 112-8. Title.
This article shall be known as and may be cited as the "Barnstable Historic
Landmark Ordinance."
§ 112-9. Authority.
This article is enacted pursuant to authority derived from Section 6 of
the Home Rule Amendment to the Constitution of the Commonwealth of
Massachusetts, and Charter of the Town of Barnstable.
§ 112-10. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to promote the educational, cultural, economic
and general welfare of the public through the preservation and protection
of the distinctive characteristics of structures and landscapes significant in
the history or architecture of Barnstable, and through the maintenance and
improvement of settings for such structures and landscapes.
§ 112-11. Definitions.
For purposes of this article, the following words shall have the following
meanings:
ALTERED — Changed in exterior color or appearance, rebuilt,
reconstructed, restored, removed, or remodelled.
BUILDING — A combination of materials forming a shelter for persons,
animals, or property.
COMMISSION — The municipal historical commission established under
§ 8D of Chapter 40 of the General Laws.
CONSTRUCTED — Built, erected, installed, enlarged, or moved.
DEMOLISHED — Destroyed or altered in such a substantial manner as to
constitute destruction.
EXTERIOR ARCHITECTURAL FEATURE — A portion of the exterior of a
building or structure as is open to view from a public street, public way,
public park, or public body of water or is identified for preservation in an
ordinance establishing a district or landmark, including but not limited to
the architectural style and general arrangement and setting thereof, the
kind, color, and texture of exterior building materials, the color of paint
or other materials applied to exterior surfaces and the type and style of
windows, doors, lights, signs, and other appurtenant exterior fixtures.
LANDMARK — Any structure or landscape as established in accordance
with § 112-12.
§ 112-8 HAZARDOUS MATERIALS § 112-11
108:143
LANDSCAPE — A streetscape or an arrangement of land for human use
and enjoyment, including placement of structures, vehicular and
pedestrianways, and plantings.
PERSON AGGRIEVED — The applicant, an owner of adjoining property, an
owner of property within the same historic district or of property within
100 feet of the property lines of the property subject of the application, and
any charitable corporation having as one of its purposes the preservation of
historic buildings or places.
STRUCTURE — A combination of materials including, but not limited to, a
building, bridge, tower or other engineering work, sign, fence, wall, terrace,
walk, or driveway.
§ 112-12. Procedure for designation as landmark.
The Commission by majority vote may recommend for designation as
a landmark any property owned by the Town, and any other property
within the Town with the consent of the owner thereof, being or
containing a structure or landscape which it determines to be either
(a) importantly associated with one or more historic persons or events,
or with the broad architectural, aesthetic, cultural, political economic,
or social history of the Town or the Commonwealth, or (b) historically
or architecturally significant (in terms of period, style, method of
construction, or association with a famous architect or builder) either
by itself or in the context of a group of structures and may recommend
amendments to any designation of landmark theretofor made.
A.
Prior to the recommendation of designation or amendment of
designation of any landmark, an investigation and report on the
historical, architectural and other relevant significance thereof shall be
made by the Commission. The report shall recommend the boundaries
of any proposed landmark and shall recommend for incorporation in
the order of the Town Council designating each landmark general
and/or specific standards and appropriate criteria consistent with the
purposes of this article and all provisions herein.
B.
Any 10 registered voters of the Town may petition that the Commission
initiate, or the Commission on its own may initiate, the process of
designating a landmark or amending or rescinding any such
designation theretofor made. The Commission shall within 45 days
following the filing of such request or petition hold a preliminary
hearing and arrange for preparation of a report which in the case
of such a voter petition shall be prepared by such voters unless the
petitioners and the Commission elect otherwise. The Commission shall
not reconsider a proposed designation, amendment or rescission of
designation within one year of its previous hearing thereon, unless 2/
3 of the Commission's members vote to do so. No less than 45 nor
more than 60 days after the transmittal of a report to the Commission
pertaining to a proposed designation, the Commission shall hold a
public hearing. The Commission shall give not less than 14 days notice
C.
§ 112-11 BARNSTABLE CODE § 112-12
108:144
§ 112-13. Review authority.
of such public hearing by publication in a newspaper of general
circulation in Barnstable and by mailing notice thereof to the owner
of the proposed landmark and to every property owner abutting the
proposed landmark (each such owner to be determined from the then
current records of the Assessing Department), and to the Town Council,
the Planning Board, and the Town Clerk.
Prior to the public hearing, the Commission shall transmit copies of
the report to the Planning Board for its consideration and
recommendations.
D.
The recommendations of the Commission with regard to any
designation, amendment or rescission shall be transmitted to the Town
Council and to the Town Clerk with a copy of the approved designation
report. Designation of a landmark or amendment or rescission of
previous designation shall be by order of the Town Council. In the case
of a designation, the order shall include a statement of the reasons
for such designation and a statement of the standards which the
Commission is to apply under §§ 112-13 through 17 herein.
E.
No designation, amendment or rescission of designation shall become
effective until a map setting forth the boundaries of the landmark or
change in the boundaries thereof has been filed with the Town Council
and has been recorded with the Registry of Deeds for Barnstable
County.
F.
Except as the order designating or amending a landmark may otherwise
provide in accordance with this section, the Commission shall review
all construction, demolition or alteration that affects the exterior
architectural features of any landmark.
A.
The order designating or amending a landmark may provide that the
authority of the Commission shall not extend to the review of one or
more of the following categories of structures or exterior architectural
features of a landmark in which event the structures or exterior
architectural features so excluded may be constructed or altered
without review by the Commission.
Temporary structures or signs, subject, however, to such conditions
as duration of use, location, lighting, removal and similar matters
as the Commission may reasonable specify.
(1)
Terraces, walkways, driveways, sidewalks, and similar elements,
or anyone or none of them, provided that any such element is
substantially at grade level.
(2)
(3) Walls and fences, or either of them.
(4) Storm doors and windows, screens, air conditioners,
B.
§ 112-12 HAZARDOUS MATERIALS § 112-13
108:145
§ 112-14. Ordinary maintenance, repair and replacement.
Nothing in this article shall be construed to prevent the ordinary
maintenance, repair or replacement of any exterior architectural feature
of a landmark which does not involve a change in design or material or
the outward appearance thereof, nor to prevent landscaping with plants,
trees or shrubs, nor construed to prevent compliance with requirements
certified by a duly authorized public officer to be necessary for public safety
because of an unsafe or dangerous condition, nor construed to prevent any
construction or alteration under a permit duly issued prior to the effective
date of the order which designated that landmark, nor construed to prevent
the reconstruction, substantially similar in exterior design, of a structure
or exterior architectural feature damaged by fire, storm or other disaster,
provided such reconstruction is commenced within one year thereafter and
carried forth with due diligence.
§ 112-15. Certificates of appropriateness, nonapplicability or
hardship.
Lighting fixtures, antennae and similar appurtenances, or any one
or more of them.
(5)
(6) The color of paint.
(7) The color of materials used on roofs.
Signs of not more than one square foot in area in connection
with use of a residence for a customary home occupation or for
professional purposes, provided only one such sign is displayed in
connection with each residence and if illuminated is illuminated
only indirectly; and one sign in connection with the nonresidential
use of each building or structure which is not more than four
square feet in area, consists of letters painted on wood without
symbol or trademark and if illuminated is illuminated only
indirectly; or either of them.
(8)
The reconstruction, substantially similar in exterior design, of a
building, structure or exterior architectural feature damaged or
destroyed by fire, storm or other disaster, provided such
reconstruction is commenced within one year thereafter and
carried forward with due diligence.
(9)
Unless such action is inconsistent with the provisions of a specific
order, the Commission may determine from time to time after a public
hearing that certain categories of exterior architectural features or
structures, including, without limitation, any of those enumerated in
this section, may be constructed or altered without review by the
Commission without causing substantial derogations from the intent
and purposes of this article.
C.
§ 112-13 BARNSTABLE CODE § 112-15
108:146
§ 112-16. Factors to be considered by Commission.
§ 112-17. Powers, functions and duties of Commission.
The Commission shall have the powers, functions and duties with respect
to each landmark as is provided historic district commissions under Clauses
(a) through (g) of § 10 of Chapter 40C of the General Laws with respect
to historic districts, including without limitation with respect to approval
Except as the order designating or amending a landmark may otherwise
provide, no landmark shall be constructed or altered in any way that
affects exterior architectural features unless the Commission shall have
first issued a certificate of appropriateness, a certificate of
nonapplicability or a certificate of hardship with respect to such
construction or alteration.
A.
Any person who desires to obtain a certificate from the Commission
shall file with the Commission an application for a certificate of
appropriateness, a certificate of nonapplicability or a certificate of
hardship, as the case may be, in such form as the Commission may
reasonably determine, together with such plans, elevations,
specifications, materials and other information, including in the case
of demolition or removal a statement of the proposed condition and
appearance of the property thereafter, as may be reasonably deemed
necessary by the Commission to enable it to make a determination on
the application.
B.
No building permit for alteration of an exterior architectural feature
of a landmark or construction of a structure feature and no demolition
permit for demolition or removal of a landmark shall be issued by the
Town or any department thereof until the certificate required by this
section has been issued by the Commission.
C.
In rendering a decision on an application as described herein, the
Commission shall consider, among other factors, the historic and
architectural value and significance of the landmark, the general
design, arrangement, texture and material of the features involved, and
the relation of such features to similar features in the surrounding
area. In the case of new construction or additions to existing structures
the Commission shall consider the appropriateness of the size and
shape of the landmark both in relation to the land area upon which
the landmark is situated and to other structures in the vicinity, and
the Commission may impose dimensional and setback requirements
in addition to those required by an applicable provision of a zoning
ordinance. A Commission shall not consider interior arrangements or
architectural features not subject to public view.
A.
The Commission shall not make any recommendation or requirement
except for the purpose of preventing developments incongruous to the
historic aspects, architectural significance or the distinctive character
of the landmark.
B.
§ 112-15 HAZARDOUS MATERIALS § 112-17
108:147
and disapproval of certificates of appropriateness, nonapplicability and
hardship, the dating and signing of such certificates, the keeping of records
and adoption of rules and regulations, the filing with the Town Clerk and
Building Department of certificates and determinations of disapproval by
it, and the determination of designs of appurtenances which will meet the
requirements of the landmark.
§ 112-18. Procedures for public meetings and hearings.
The Commission shall adopt rules for the reasonable conduct of meetings
and public hearings, which rules shall not be inconsistent with the
procedures provided for meetings of and hearings by the historic district
commissions under § 11 of Chapter 40C of the General Laws. In the absence
of the adoption of any such rules, meetings and public hearings of the
Commission shall be in conformity with the provisions of § 11 of Chapter
40C applicable to historic district commissions.
§ 112-19. Appeals.
§ 112-20. Enforcement and remedies.
The Commission is specifically authorized to institute any and all actions
in court, including an action for injunctive relief, as deemed necessary and
appropriate to obtain compliance with the requirements of any section of
this article or to prevent a threatened violation thereof. Any violation of this
article may be punished to the like extent provided in § 13 of Chapter 40C
of the General Laws for a violation of said chapter, except that no such fine
shall exceed $300. In addition to the foregoing, no building permit shall
be issued, with respect to any premises upon which a landmark has been
voluntarily demolished otherwise than pursuant to a certificate granted
after compliance with the provisions of this article, for a period of two years
after the date of the completion of such demolition. (The word "premises"
for the purpose of this sentence refers to the parcel of land upon which the
Any person aggrieved by a designation, amendment or rescission of
a landmark or a decision on an application for a certificate may file
a written appeal with the Commission for a review by a person or
persons of competence and experience in such matters, designated
by the Town Council. The appeal must be filed within 21 days of the
filing of the Commission's action with the Town Clerk. The reviewing
authority, after due and proper notice, shall conduct a hearing on the
Commission's action and either affirm, modify or rescind said action.
A.
Any person aggrieved by a decision of the reviewing authority
concerning such an appeal may seek further review in the Superior
Court within 30 days of a formal decision or within 60 days of the filing
of the appeal if the reviewing authority fails to act. Such review shall be
made in the same manner as provided in § 12A of Chapter 40C of the
General Laws.
B.
§ 112-17 BARNSTABLE CODE § 112-20
108:148
demolished structure was located and all adjoining parcels of land under
common ownership or control.)
§ 112-21. Historical Commission authority.
No provision of this article shall alter or diminish the duties and functions
of the Commission under the authority of Chapter 40, § 8D, or of a historic
district commission established under the authority of Chapter 40C of
the General Laws, or restrict the establishment of any additional historic
district under said Chapter 40C.
§ 112-22. Severability.
The provisions of this article are severable. If any provision shall be held
to be invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, the
remaining provisions shall continue in full force and effect.
§ 112-20 HAZARDOUS MATERIALS § 112-22
108:149

ARTICLE III
Hyannis Main Street Waterfront Historic District
[Adopted 10-3-1996 by Order No. 97-014B (Art. LX of Ch. III of the
General Ordinances as updated through 7-7-2003)]
§ 112-23. Authority.
This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Hyannis Main Street
Waterfront Historic District Ordinance." It is adopted pursuant to Chapter
40C of the General Laws of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts, as
amended.
§ 112-24. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to promote the educational, cultural, economic
and general welfare of the inhabitants of the Town of Barnstable, and
the Town's unique community character, through the preservation and
protection of the distinctive characteristics of buildings, structures, and
places significant in the history and architecture of Barnstable, and through
the preservation, maintenance and improvement of appropriate settings
for such buildings, structures, and places, and the encouragement of new
design which is compatible with the existing historical and community
character, and through the benefits resulting to the economy of said Town
by preserving and enhancing the amenities and historical aspects of the
various villages and areas which make Barnstable a desirable place to live
and for tourists to visit.
§ 112-25. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms have the following meaning:
ALTERED — Changed in exterior color, or otherwise exteriorly changed,
rebuilt, reconstructed, restored, removed, and/or remodeled.
BUILDING — A combination of materials forming shelter for persons,
animals or property.
CERTIFICATE — A certificate of appropriateness, a certificate of
nonapplicability, or a certificate of hardship as set forth in this article.
COMMISSION — The Hyannis Main Street Waterfront Historic District
Commission acting under this article.
COMMITTEE — The Historic District Appeals Committee established by the
Town Council to act as an interim appeals body.
CONSTRUCTED — Built, erected, installed, enlarged, and/or moved.
DEMOLISHED — A building, structure, or any portion thereof, that is
pulled down, destroyed, dismantled, removed, or razed in such a substantial
manner as to constitute destruction.
DISTRICT — The historic area containing buildings, structures, settings,
and places as established in accordance with this article.
§ 112-23 HAZARDOUS MATERIALS § 112-25
108:151
EXTERIOR ARCHITECTURAL FEATURE — Such exterior portions of
buildings, structures, and places that are visible from public rights-of-way,
including but not limited to architectural style and general arrangement
and setting thereof, the kind, color, and texture of exterior building
materials, the color of paint or other materials applied to the exterior
surfaces, and the type and style of windows, doors, lights, signs and other
appurtenant exterior features.
PERSON — An individual or corporation, a municipal agency, or an
unincorporated organization or association.
PERSON AGGRIEVED — The applicant, an owner of adjoining property, an
owner of property within the same Historic District within 100 feet of the
property lines of the property subject to the application.
PUBLIC WAY — Ways open to and usable by the public.
PUBLIC VIEW — Visible from a street, public way, public park, or public
body of water.
SETTING — Both the natural and man-made aspects of the physical
environment and character of a historic property, including but not limited
to siting, relationship to surrounding features, topography, vegetation,
paths, roads, fences, and walls.
SIGN — Any symbol, design or device used to identify or advertise any place
of business product, activity, or person.
STRUCTURE — A combination of materials other than a building, including
but not limited to a bridge, tower or other engineered work, sign, fence,
wall, terrace, walk, driveway, or pavement.
TEMPORARY STRUCTURE OR BUILDING — Building that shall not be in
existence for a period of more than two years, and a structure not to be in
existence for a period of more than one year. The Commission may further
limit the time periods set forth herein as it deems appropriate.
§ 112-26. Establishment of district.
There is hereby established a Historic District in the Town of Barnstable
to be known as the "Hyannis Main Street Waterfront Historic District." It
includes all of the land as shown on the official map on file with the Town
Clerk and at the Barnstable County Registry of Deeds.
§ 112-27. Establishment of Commission.
There is hereby established in the Town of Barnstable the Hyannis
Main Street Waterfront Historic District Commission, hereinafter called
the "Commission" that shall be responsible for overseeing the Historic
District. It shall consist of seven unpaid members who shall be
appointed by the Town Council to serve for terms of three years. The
Commission shall have the powers and authority to perform all the
duties as hereinafter enumerated and provided, and those that may be
added from time to time.
A.
§ 112-25 BARNSTABLE CODE § 112-27
108:152
§ 112-28. Commission powers, duties, and administration.
When the Commission is established, two members shall be appointed
for a term of one year, three shall be appointed for terms of two
years, and two shall be appointed for terms of three years, and their
successors shall be appointed for terms of three years on a staggered
basis.
B.
The Commission members shall include one member appointed from
two nominees of each of the following organizations: the Barnstable
Historical Commission, the Massachusetts State Chapter of the
American Institute of Architects, and the Cape Cod and Islands Board
of Realtors and four members who are residents and/or business
operators from the district. In the event that no nominations by one
or another of the above-named nominating groups have been received
within 30 days from the date of an invitation to nominate, the Town
Council may make the appointment to the Commission without such
nomination. In addition, to the extent possible, members should be
appointed from among professionals in the disciplines of architecture,
history, architectural history, planning, archaeology, or closely related
fields. All Commission members should have demonstrated special
interest, competence, and/or knowledge of community history,
character, and historic preservation.
C.
Three alternate members may be appointed annually by the Town
Council as well, maintaining the same representation as above. In the
case of absence, inability to act, or unwillingness to act because of selfinterest
on the part of any member of the Commission, his or her place
shall be taken by an alternate member designated by Chairman.
D.
Each member and alternate member shall continue to serve in office
after the expiration date or his or her term until a successor is duly
appointed. Vacancies occurring in the Commission other than by
expiration of term shall be filled by appointment by the Town Council
for the remaining term of the member replaced.
E.
The Commission shall annually elect a Chairman and Vice Chairman
from among its principal members, and a secretary/clerk from within
its membership. In the case of the absence of the Chairman from any
meeting, the Vice Chairman shall preside.
F.
Meetings of the Commission shall be held at the call of the Chairman,
at the request of two members, or in such other manner as the
Commission shall determine in its rules and regulations. The Open
Meeting Law, Commonwealth of Massachusetts, Chapter 694 of the
Acts of 1986,14 shall apply at all times. Four members shall constitute a
quorum.
G.
14.Editor's Note: See MGL C. 39, § 23B.
§ 112-27 HAZARDOUS MATERIALS § 112-28
108:153
The Commission shall have the power, authority, and duty to do and
perform any and all acts which may be necessary or desirable to
carry out the purposes of this article. In addition, the Commission
shall have any such other powers, authority, and duties as may be
delegated or assigned to it from time to time by vote of the Town
Council. Nothing in this article shall supersede the authority given to
the Building Commissioner under the State Building Code.
A.
In exercising its powers and duties hereunder, the Commission shall
pay due regard to the distinctive characteristics of each building,
structure, site, and setting, and to the district as a whole. For the
purposes of this article, any structure partially within the district shall
be considered wholly within the district.
B.
The Commission shall, after a public hearing duly posted at least 14
days in advance in a conspicuous place in Barnstable Town Hall, adopt
and amend guidelines which set forth design standards and criteria for
certain exterior architectural building and site features which will meet
the requirements of the district regarding appropriateness. No such
design guidelines shall limit the right of an applicant for a certificate to
present other designs to the Commission for approval.
C.
The Commission may also determine from time to time, after public
hearing, that certain categories of exterior architectural features,
structures, or signs may be constructed or altered without Commission
review.
D.
The Commission may adopt and amend reasonable rules and
regulations not inconsistent with the General Laws, or with the purpose
of this article, and prescribe such forms and procedures as it deems
desirable and necessary for the regulation of its affairs, and for the
conduct of its business, including requirements for the contents and
form of applications for certificates, hearing procedures, and other
matters. The Commission shall file a copy of said rules with the Town
Clerk.
E.
The Commission may advise and coordinate with the Town Manager
and other agencies of Town government under the Town Charter with
respect to:
(1) Employment of clerical, technical assistance/consultants;
Apply for, accept, receive, and expend grants, gifts, contributions,
and bequests of funds from individuals, foundations, and from
federal, state, and other governmental bodies, and may expend the
same, for purpose of furthering the Commission's programs;
(2)
Imposition of reasonable fees to cover the cost associated with the
conduct of business as reviewed annually per the Town's general
ordinances.
(3)
F.
§ 112-28 BARNSTABLE CODE § 112-28
108:154
§ 112-29. Commission jurisdiction.
The Commission shall keep a permanent and accurate record of its
meetings, resolutions, transactions, and determinations, including the
vote of each member participating therein.
G.
The Commission may provide technical assistance to property owners
within the district, and to other Town residents, on matters pertaining
to historic preservation. The Commission may also develop programs
and publications that promote understanding and support for district
objectives.
H.
Except as this article may otherwise provide, no building, structure,
setting or part thereof within the district shall be constructed,
demolished, moved or altered in any way that affects any exterior
architectural feature subject to public view until the Commission shall
first have issued a certificate of appropriateness, certificate of
nonapplicability, or certificate of hardship with respect to such
construction, demolition, movement, or alteration.
A.
No building permit for the construction of any building or structure or
for the alteration of any exterior architectural feature within the district
which is subject to public view shall be issued by the Town or any
department thereof until a certificate of appropriateness, certificate
of nonapplicability, or certificate of hardship has been issued by the
Commission as required under this article, except that the Building
Commissioner may issue a temporary sign permit for a period not to
exceed 60 days for a temporary sign no larger than eight square feet on
a commercial premises, provided that size is in conformance with the
Town's Sign Code15 and:
The applicant files a date-stamped copy of the application for a
certificate of appropriateness, certificate of nonapplicability, or
certificate of hardship from the Historic District Commission.
(1)
Should the Historic District Commission deny the application, use
of the temporary sign should not be permitted beyond the end of
the twenty-day appeal period of the decision made by the Historic
District Commission.
(2)
Should the applicant appeal the denial of the application, and
should the appeal be denied, use of the sign should no longer be
permitted as of the day on which the Appeals Committee makes this
decision.
(3)
B.
No permit for the demolition, razing, movement, or removal of a
building or structure, or parts thereof within the district which is
subject to public view shall be issued by the Town or any department
thereof until a certificate of appropriateness, certificate of
C.
15.See Ch. 240, Zoning, Art. VII, Sign Regulations.
§ 112-28 HAZARDOUS MATERIALS § 112-29
108:155
§ 112-30. Limitations, exclusions, and exemptions.
The Commission shall not make any recommendations or requirements
except for the purpose of preventing structural developments obviously
incongruous to the historical or architectural characteristics of the area and
the context of its surroundings. In addition, the Commission shall exclude
the following specific items from its purview:
nonapplicability, or certificate of hardship has been issued by the
Commission as required under this article.
Consideration of interior arrangements or exterior features not visible
from a public way;
A.
Ordinary maintenance, repair, repainting, or replacement of any
exterior building or site feature within the district which does not
involve a change in design, material, color, or the outward appearance
thereof;
B.
C. Ordinary landscaping with plants, trees, or shrubs;
Actions taken to meet requirements certified by a duly authorized
public officer to be necessary for public safety;
D.
Any construction or alteration under a permit duly issued prior to the
effective date of this article;
E.
Temporary structures for official celebrations or charitable drives, or
directly connected with permitted construction, subject however, to
conditions pertaining to the duration of existence and use, location,
lighting, removal, and similar matters as the Commission may
reasonably specify;
F.
Temporary signs subject however, to conditions pertaining to the
duration of existence and use, location, lighting, removal, and similar
matters as the Commission may reasonably specify including:
Those for use in connection with any official celebration, parade, or
any charitable drive, as long as they are removed within two days
of the termination of the event, provided that they are authorized
by the Building Inspector;
(1)
Single-faced sale or rent signs as allowed by the Town Zoning
Ordinance,16 advertising the sale or rental of the premises on which
they are erected or displayed;
(2)
(3) Special permit signs as allowed by the Town Zoning Ordinance.
G.
The removal of any sign unless the sign is deemed to contribute to the
historic character of the district;
H.
16.Editor's Note: See Ch. 240, Zoning.
§ 112-29 BARNSTABLE CODE § 112-30
108:156
§ 112-31. Procedures for review of applications.
The installation of storm doors without ornamentation, storm windows,
screens, gutters, and downspouts, provided they are the same color as
the building or building trim.
I.
Any person who desires to obtain a certificate from the Commission
shall file with the Commission an application for a certificate of
appropriateness, a certificate of nonapplicability, or a certificate of
hardship, as the case may be, in such form as the Commission may
reasonably determine. The application shall be accompanied by such
plans, elevations, specifications, photographs, paint color samples, or
other materials or information the Commission deems necessary to
make a determination on the application. In the case of a demolition or
removal, an evaluation of the property condition and appearance shall
be included. The date of the filing of an application shall be the date on
which a copy of such application is received by the Commission.
A.
The Commission, or a delegate thereof, shall determine promptly, and
in all events within 14 days after the filing of an application for a
certificate of appropriateness, a certificate of nonapplicability, or a
certificate of hardship, as the case may be, whether the application
involves any exterior architectural or site features that are subject to
review by the Commission.
B.
If the Commission, or a delegate thereof, determines that an application
for a certificate does not involve any such exterior architectural or
site features, the Commission shall forthwith issue a certificate of
nonapplicability.
C.
If the Commission determines that such application for a certificate
does involve any exterior architectural or site features subject to review
under this article, the Commission shall hold a public hearing on the
application, except as may otherwise be provided in this article, within
30 days of filing of the application. At least 14 days before said public
hearing, public notice of the time, place, and purposes thereof shall be
given by posting in a conspicuous place in Town Hall, and by mailing a
copy of said public notice, postage prepaid, to the:
(1) Applicant;
Owners of all adjoining property and other property deemed by the
Commission to be materially affected thereby as they appear on the
most recent real estate tax list of the Board of Assessors;
(2)
(3) Planning Board;
Any person filing a written request for notice of hearings, such
request to be renewed yearly in December; and
(4)
Such other persons as the Commission shall deem entitled to
notice.
(5)
D.
§ 112-30 HAZARDOUS MATERIALS § 112-31
108:157
As soon as convenient after such public hearing, but in any event within
45 days after the filing of an application for a certificate, or within
such further time as the applicant may allow in writing, the Commission
shall make a determination on the application, and issue a certificate
or a disapproval. In the case of a disapproval of an application for
a certificate, the Commission shall set forth in its disapproval the
reasons for such determination. The Commission may include in its
disapproval specific recommendations for changes in the applicant's
proposal with respect to the appropriateness of design, arrangement,
texture, material, and similar features which if made and filed with the
Commission in a subsequent application, would make the application
acceptable to the Commission.
E.
Prior to the issuance of a disapproval of an application for a certificate
of appropriateness, the Commission may, at its sole discretion, notify
the applicant in writing of its proposed action accompanied by specific
recommendations of changes in the applicant's proposal which, if made,
would make the application acceptable to the Commission. If within
30 days of the receipt of such notice the applicant files a written
modification of the application in conformity with the recommended
changes of the Commission, the Commission shall issue a certificate of
appropriateness.
F.
Certificates shall be issued upon a concurring vote of a majority of
the members of the Commission. Each certificate of appropriateness,
nonapplicability or hardship issued by the Commission shall be dated
and signed by its Chairman, Secretary, or such other person designated
by the Commission to sign such certificates on its behalf.
G.
In issuing certificates, the Commission may, as it deems appropriate,
impose certain conditions and limitations and may require architectural
or plan modifications consistent with the intent and purpose of this
article.
H.
The Commission shall issue a certificate of appropriateness based upon
the application if it determines that the construction, alteration, or
demolition for which an application has been filed will be appropriate
for or compatible with the preservation or protection of the district.
Nothing herein shall prevent the Commission from making
recommendations for changes in the applicant's proposal, which may
include changes in design, arrangement, texture, material, and similar
features, that, if made, would make the application acceptable to the
Commission, and if the applicant so assents, including such
modifications in any certificate of appropriateness it may issue.
I.
The Commission shall issue a certificate of hardship to the applicant
if the Commission determines that: (1) owing to conditions especially
affecting the building, structure, setting, or place involved, but not
affecting the district generally, failure to approve an application will
involve a substantial hardship, financial or otherwise, to the applicant;
(2) such application may be approved without substantial derogation
J.
§ 112-31 BARNSTABLE CODE § 112-31
108:158
§ 112-32. Criteria for Commission determinations.
from the intent and purpose of this chapter; and (3) the application
may be approved without substantial detriment to the public welfare.
If the Commission determines that owing to such conditions failure to
approve an application will involve substantial hardship to the applicant
and approval thereof may be made without such substantial detriment
or derogation, the Commission shall issue a certificate of hardship.
If the Commission fails to make a determination through issuance of a
certificate of appropriateness or a disapproval within the time period
specified in Subsection E (45 days), or within such further time as the
applicant may allow in writing, the Commission shall thereupon issue a
certificate of hardship due to failure to act.
K.
The Commission shall send a copy of its certificates and determinations
of disapproval to the applicant, and shall file such copies with the
offices of the Town Clerk, and the Building Commissioner. The date
of issuance of a certificate or determination of disapproval shall be
the date of the filing of a copy of such certificate or determination of
disapproval with the office of the Town Clerk.
L.
In deliberating on applications for certificates, the Commission shall
consider, among other things, the historical and architectural value
and significance of the site, building, structure, setting, or place; the
general exterior design, scale, color, placement on the lot including
dimensions and setback, arrangement, proportions, texture, material of
the building or structure; setting, topography, landscaping, and general
appearance of the feature(s) involved and the relation of such feature(s)
to similar features of buildings and structures in the surrounding area;
and the position of such buildings or structures in relation to the streets
or ways and to other buildings or structures.
A.
In the case of new construction or additions to existing buildings or
structures the Commission shall consider the appropriateness of the
size, shape, and location of the building or structure, both in relation
to the land area upon which the building or structure is situated and to
buildings, structures, and general setting in the vicinity.
B.
In cases of demolition or removal, the Commission shall consider
whether such demolition or removal of a building, structure, setting, or
site element whose architectural or historical significance contributes
to the historic character of the district would impair the public interest
and the general welfare of the people of Barnstable; whether the
demolition or removal of the building or structure would undermine the
purpose and intent of this article, whether the building or structure has
so deteriorated that preservation or restoration is not structurally or
economically feasible, provided that the owner's self-created hardship
or failure to maintain the property in good repair shall not qualify as
a basis for the issuance of a certificate of hardship. The Commission
C.
§ 112-31 HAZARDOUS MATERIALS § 112-32
108:159
§ 112-33. Appeals.
§ 112-34. Enforcement; violations and penalties.
may seek advise from individuals or organizations in making these
determinations.
The Commission shall not make any recommendation or requirement
except for the purpose of preventing developments incongruous to
the historical aspects or the architectural and other physical
characteristics of the surroundings and of the district.
D.
Pursuant to Section 5-1 of the Town of Barnstable Home Rule Charter,
there shall be established a Historic District Appeals Committee,
hereinafter called the Committee, which shall consist of three members
independent of the Commission appointed annually by the Town
Council. The Committee shall include one member, where possible,
from the Hyannis business community, one member, where possible,
who is a resident of Hyannis, and one member, where possible, from the
field of architecture or a related profession.
A.
Any person or persons aggrieved by a determination of the Commission,
or by its failure to act as specified in this article, may, within 20
calendar days after the filing of such notice with the Town Clerk,
appeal to the Committee in writing. The Committee shall hear all
pertinent evidence and act upon such appeals within 30 calendar days
after the filing of such appeal. The decision of the Committee shall
be determined by a majority vote of the Committee members. If they
determine that the Commission action is unsupported by the evidence,
or exceeds the authority of the Commission, they may annul the
Commission decision, or remand the case for further action by the
Commission. The findings of the Committee shall be binding on the
applicant and the Commission unless a further appeal is sought in the
Superior Court.
B.
Any person or persons aggrieved by a determination of the Commission,
or by its failure to act as specified in this article, or by a finding of
the Committee, may appeal to the Superior Court sitting in equity for
Barnstable County.
C.
Costs shall not be allowed against the Commission or the Committee
unless it shall appear to the court that the such Commission or
Committee acted with gross negligence, in bad faith, or with malice in
the matter from which the appeal was taken.
D.
Costs shall not be allowed against the party appealing such decision of
the Commission or Committee unless it shall appear to the Court that
the appellant acted in bad faith or with malice in making the appeal to
the Court.
E.
§ 112-32 BARNSTABLE CODE § 112-34
108:160
§ 112-35. Effective date.
This article shall become effective upon appointment of all members to the
Commission and Committee and adoption of design guidelines and the filing
of the map showing the boundaries of the district is filed with the Town
Clerk and is recorded in the Registry of Deeds for Barnstable County. The
foregoing shall be implemented not later than one year from adoption of
this article by the Town Council.
§ 112-36. Severability.
In case any provision, section, paragraph, or part of this article be for any
reason declared invalid or held unconstitutional by any court of competent
jurisdiction, every other provision, section, paragraph or part shall continue
in full force and effect.
The Building Commissioner shall be charged with the enforcement of
this article.
A.
The Superior Court sitting in equity for Barnstable County has
jurisdiction to enforce the provisions of this article and the rulings
issued thereunder. Upon petition by the Commission or the Town
Manager, said Court may restrain the applicant through injunction and
without limitation may order the removal of any building, structure
or exterior architectural feature constructed in violation thereof, or
the substantial restoration of any building, structure or exterior
architectural feature altered or demolished in violation thereof, and
may issue such other orders for relief as may be equitable. Nothing in
this chapter shall be construed to limit the Commission from pursuing
other available remedies including those provided by § 21D of Chapter
40 of the General Laws.
B.
Any person who violates any of the provisions of this article shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof, shall be fined
$200, which shall be forfeited to the use of the Town. Each day that a
violation continues to exist shall constitute a separate offense.
C.
§ 112-34 HAZARDOUS MATERIALS § 112-36
108:161
Chapter 115
HOURS OF OPERATION OF BUSINESSES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alcoholic beverages — See Ch. 20.
Body-piercing businesses — See Ch. 43.
Noise — See Ch. 133.
Administrative Code — See Ch. 241.
§ 115-1. Purpose; hours established.
For the purpose of controlling noise and promoting the public peace and
to protect public safety and nighttime tranquility, no person or business
entity conducting any retail business shall be open for business to the public
between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 3:00 a.m. without the prior approval
of the Town Manager as provided herein. The term "retail business" shall
include food service establishments.
§ 115-2. Approval for change; permit.
Said approval may be granted by the Town Manager in the form of a permit
issued after a public hearing, notice of which shall be published 14 days
prior to said hearing. The Town Manager may issue such a permit if, after
consideration of the effect the business may have on abutting residences
and its impact on the community, as it relates to public safety, noise and
traffic, he finds that it is unlikely that the operation of the business during
the hours regulated by this chapter will itself cause a disturbance or will
be an attraction for crowds which may cause a disturbance. The permit
may be granted by the Town Manager upon conditions designed to advance
the purposes of this chapter. The permit may be revoked at any time upon
complaint by the Police Department, at a public hearing, notice of which
shall be published 14 days prior to said hearing.
§ 115-3. Effect on alcoholic beverage licensing.
This chapter shall not be construed to interfere with the discretion vested in
the Licensing Authority created under § 241-25 of the Administrative Code
and under Chapter 138 of the General Laws, with respect to the sale of
alcoholic beverages.
§ 115-4. Violations and penalties.
The penalty for violation of this chapter shall be a fine of $200 per day for
each day said business is found to continue.
§ 112-36 BARNSTABLE CODE § 115-5
115:162
§ 115-5. Review of provisions. [Added 7-20-2006 by Order No.
2006-148]
On or before May 1, 2008, there will be a review of Chapter 115 for
consideration of changing it or eliminating it.
Chapter 121
LICENSING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Noncriminal enforcement of violations — See
Ch. 1, Art. I.
§ 115-5 HOURS OF OPERATION OF BUSINESSES § 115-5
115:163

ARTICLE I
Denial for Nonpayment of Municipal Charges
[Adopted 11-1-1986, approved 11-25-1986 (Art. II of Ch. IV of the
General Ordinances as updated through 7-7-2003)]
§ 121-1. List of delinquent payers.
The Tax Collector shall annually furnish to each licensing authority of the
Town a list of any party that has neglected or refused to pay any local taxes,
fees, assessments, betterments or other municipal charges for not less than
a twelve-month period, and that such party has not filed in good faith a
pending application for abatement of such a tax or a pending petition before
the appellate tax board.
§ 121-2. Notice of revocation or suspension of license or permit;
hearing.
The licensing authority may deny, revoke or suspend any license or permit,
including renewals and transfers of any party whose name appears on
the list authorized under § 121-1; provided, however, that written notice
is given to the party and the Tax Collector, as required by the applicable
provisions of law, and the party is given a hearing, to be held not less than
14 days after said notice. Said list shall be prima facie evidence for denial,
revocation or suspension of said license or permit to any party. The Tax
Collector shall have the right to intervene in any hearing conducted under
this section. Any findings made by the licensing authority pursuant to the
hearing hereunder shall be made only for the purposes of such proceeding
and shall not be relevant to or introduced in any other proceeding at law,
except for any appeal from such license denial, revocation or suspension.
Any license or permit denied, suspended or revoked under this section
shall not be reissued or renewed until the licensing authority receives a
certificate issued by the Tax Collector that the party is in good standing with
respect to any and all local taxes, fees, assessments, betterments or other
municipal charges, payable to the Town as of the date of said certificate.
§ 121-3. Payment agreements; failure to comply with agreement.
Any party shall be given an opportunity to enter into a payment agreement,
thereby allowing the licensing authority to issue a certificate indicating
said limitations to the license or permit, and the validity of said license
shall be conditioned upon the satisfactory compliance with said agreement.
Failure to comply with said agreement shall be grounds for the suspension
or revocation of such license or permit; provided, however, that the holder
be given notice as required by applicable provisions of law.
§ 121-4. Waiver of denial by Town Manager.
The Town Manager may waive such denial, suspension or revocation if he
finds there is not direct or indirect business interest by the property owner,
its officers or stockholders, if any, or members of his immediate family, as
§ 121-1 HOURS OF OPERATION OF BUSINESSES § 121-4
115:165
defined in § 1 of Chapter 268 in the business or activity conducted in or on
said property.
§ 121-5. Nonapplicability.
This article shall not apply to licenses and permits specifically exempted
from the operation hereof under § 57 of Chapter 40 of the General Laws.
§ 121-4 BARNSTABLE CODE § 121-5
115:166
ARTICLE II
Jurisdiction Over License and Permit Issuance
[Adopted 8-18-1994 by Order No. 95-012 (Art. VIII of Ch. II of the
General Ordinances as updated through 7-7-2003)]
§ 121-6. Licenses and permits under the general laws.
The following licenses or permits under the following provisions of the
General Laws shall be within the jurisdiction of the Board of Health:
Description Chapter Section
Animal rendering 111 154
Animal stables 111 155
Baths, public 140 51
Burial 114 45, 47
Dairy products 94 40
Funeral directors 114 49
Garbage removal 111 31A
Ice cream manufacture 94 65I
Livery stable 111 155
Methyl alcohol 94 303A
Milk 94 40
Mobile homes park 140 32B
Motels 140 32B
A.
The following licenses or permits under the following provisions of
the General Laws shall be within the jurisdiction of the Building
Commissioner:
Description Chapter Section
Buildings 143 3, 3A
Elevators 143 62
B.
The following licenses or permits under the following provisions of the
General Laws shall be within the jurisdiction of the Chief of Police:
Description Chapter Section
Bicycles 85 11A
Certain work 136 7, 15
Firearms 140 121+
Gunsmith 140 122
C.
§ 121-6 HOURS OF OPERATION OF BUSINESSES § 121-6
115:167
The following licenses or permits under the following provisions of the
General Laws shall be within the jurisdiction of the Fire Chief of the
Fire District in which the license is to apply:
Description Chapter Section
Automatic sprinkler systems 148 27A
Fires, open 48 13
Fireworks 148 39A
D.
The following licenses or permits under the following provisions of the
General Laws shall be within the jurisdiction of the Gas Inspector:
Description Chapter Section
Gas appliances 143 3N, 3O
E.
The following licenses or permits under the following provisions of the
General Laws shall be within the jurisdiction of the Licensing Authority:
Description Chapter Section
Alcoholic beverage, sale and
manufacture
138 2
Automatic amusement devices 140 177A
Automobiles: automobile graveyards 140 54A
Automobiles: Class I - New car dealer 140 58, 59
Automobiles: Class II - used car
dealer
140 58, 59
Automobiles: Class III - junk dealers 140 58, 59
Bathing suit rentals 140 194 et seq.
Billiards, pool, sippio table, bowling
alleys
140 177
Boarding and lodging houses 140 23
Boats (rental) 140 194
Boats: Conveyance of passengers 140 191 et seq.
Clubs, associations dispensing food or
beverage to members
140 21E
Coffee and tea houses 140 47
Common day of rest, holidays,
entertainment
136 4
Common victuallers, restaurants 140 2
Dancing schools 140 185H
Entertainment provided by innholder
or common victualler
140 183A
Ferris wheels 140 186
F.
§ 121-6 BARNSTABLE CODE § 121-6
115:168
Description Chapter Section
Food vehicles, lunch carts 140 49
Fortune tellers 140 185I
Furnaces and steam engines 140 115
Junk collector or dealer 140 54
Lodging houses 140 23, 30
Pawnbrokers 140 70
Picnic groves 140 188
Pinball Machines 140 177A
Secondhand dealers 140 54
Skating rinks 140 186
Soft drinks 140 21A and B
Theatrical events, public exhibition 140 181
The following licenses or permits under the following provisions of the
General Laws shall be within the jurisdiction of the Plumbing Inspector:
Description Chapter Section
Plumbing 142 13
G.
The following licenses or permits under the following provisions of
the General Laws shall be within the jurisdiction of the School
Superintendent:
Description Chapter Section
Children, work permits 149 69
H.
The following licenses or permits under the following provisions of the
General Laws shall be within the jurisdiction of the Town Clerk:
Description Chapter Section
Dog kennels 140 137A
Dogs, collar licenses 140 137
Fishing, hunting, trapping 131 12
Marriage 207 28
I.
The following licenses or permits under the following provisions of the
General Laws shall be within the jurisdiction of the Town Manager:
Description Chapter Section
Airport approach regulations 90 40E
Auctioneers 100 2
Blasting operations 148 19
J.
§ 121-6 HOURS OF OPERATION OF BUSINESSES § 121-6
115:169
§ 121-7. Jurisdiction of and control by Town Manager over ways;
promulgation of rules and regulations.
Description Chapter Section
Cable television 166A 3
Coasting 85 10A
Excavation in public ways 83 8
Explosives storage, manufacture, or
sale
148 13
Gasoline service stations 148 13
Hawkers, transient vendors 101 5, 17
Moving buildings in public ways 85 18
Parking lots 148 56
Pole location permits for utility wires 166 22
Sales of articles for charitable purpose 101 33
Shellfish 130 52
Signs projected over public ways 85 8
Storage and sale of gasoline and other
explosives
148 13
Taxicabs 40 22
The following licenses or permits under the following provisions of the
General Laws shall be within the jurisdiction of the Wiring Inspector:
Description Chapter Section
Wiring 143 32
K.
The Town Manager shall have jurisdiction and control over all Town
ways, parking areas, cemeteries, landings, docks and piers and shall
be deemed to be the local officer having such jurisdiction and control
for the purpose of any general law vesting authority in a municipal
official in charge of roads, streets, ways or the like. He or she shall
have jurisdiction over yard sale permits under the laws of the Town,
and shall have the power to establish reasonable fees, by regulation
not inconsistent with the General Laws, the Charter or ordinance, with
respect to any of the foregoing.
A.
In the exercise of the foregoing jurisdiction and control, the Town
Manager may promulgate rules and regulations not inconsistent with
the General Laws, the Charter, or these ordinances. Said rules and
regulations may provide for penalties equal to the penalty specifically
established elsewhere in these ordinances, if any, otherwise not more
than $300 for each violation thereof, and for enforcement by the
method established in Chapter 1, Article I of the Code of the Town of
Barnstable.
B.
§ 121-6 BARNSTABLE CODE § 121-7
115:170
ARTICLE III
Civil Fingerprinting Criminal History Record Check for Certain
Licenses
[Adopted 9-17-2015 by Order No. 2016-008]
§ 121-8. Criminal history record check procedure.
The Police Department shall, as authorized by MGL c. 6, § 172B 1/2,
conduct state and federal fingerprint-based criminal history checks for
individuals applying for the following licenses:
(1) Hawking and peddling or other door-to-door salespeople.
(2) Ice cream truck vendors.
A.
At the time of fingerprinting, the Police Department shall notify the
individual fingerprinted that the fingerprints will be used to check the
individual's criminal history records and shall obtain the individual's
consent.
B.
The Chief of Police shall periodically check with the Executive Office
of Public Safety and Security ("EOPSS"), which has issued an
informational bulletin which explains the requirements for Town
ordinances and the procedures for obtaining criminal history
information, to see if there have been any updates.
C.
Upon receipt of the fingerprints and the appropriate fee, the Police
Department shall transmit the fingerprints it has obtained pursuant
to this article to the Identification Section of the Massachusetts State
Police, the Massachusetts Department of Criminal Justice Information
Services (DCJIS), and/or the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) or
the successors of such agencies as may be necessary for the purpose
of conducting fingerprint-based state and national criminal records
background checks of license applicants specified in this article.
D.
The Town authorizes the Massachusetts State Police, the
Massachusetts Department of Criminal Justice Information Systems
(DCJIS), and the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI), and their
successors, as may be applicable, to conduct fingerprint-based state
and national criminal record background checks, including of FBI
records, consistent with this article.
E.
The Town authorizes the Police Department to receive and utilize state
and FBI records in connection with such background checks, consistent
with this bylaw. The state and FBI criminal history will not be
disseminated to unauthorized entities.
F.
Upon receipt of a report from the FBI or other appropriate criminal
justice agency, a record subject may request and receive a copy of his/
her criminal history record from the Police Department.
G.
§ 121-8 HOURS OF OPERATION OF BUSINESSES § 121-8
115:171
§ 121-9. Use of criminal history record by licensing authorities.
An applicant who wants to challenge the accuracy or completeness of
the record received under § 121-8G shall make application directly to
the agency which contributed the challenged information. The Police
Department shall not utilize and/or transmit the results of the
fingerprint-based criminal record background check to any licensing
authority until the applicant has been afforded a reasonable time to
correct or complete the information. Where an applicant has sought
to challenge the accuracy or completeness of the record, no license
specified herein shall be issued until a determination is made by the
applicable state or federal agency regarding the applicant's request,
at which point either the original or corrected record, depending on
the determination, shall be transmitted to the applicable licensing
authority.
H.
The Police Department shall communicate the results of the fingerprintbased
criminal record background checks to the appropriate
governmental licensing authority within the Town pursuant to § 121-8A.
The Police Department shall, in addition, render to the licensing
authority its evaluation of the applicant's suitability for the proposed
occupational activity based upon the results of the criminal records
background check and any other relevant information known to it.
The Police Department shall indicate whether the applicant has been
convicted of, or is awaiting final adjudication for, a crime that bears
upon his or her suitability or any felony or misdemeanor that involved
force or threat of force, controlled substances or a sex-related offense.
I.
No such suitability evaluation or communication shall be disseminated
to unauthorized entities.
J.
The Town Manager is authorized to promulgate regulations for the
implementation of the proposed ordinance, after consultation with the
Chief of Police.
K.
Town licensing authorities shall utilize the results of fingerprint-based
criminal record background checks for the sole purpose of determining
the suitability of the subjects of the checks in connection with the
license applications specified in this article.
A.
Town licensing authorities may deny an application for the license
on the basis of the results of a fingerprint-based criminal record
background check and upon the evaluation provided by the Police
Department if it determines that the results render the subject
unsuitable for the proposed occupational activity. The licensing
authority shall consider all applicable laws, regulations and Town
policies bearing on an applicant's suitability in making this
determination.
B.
The Town or any of its officers, departments, boards, committees or
other licensing authorities is hereby authorized to deny any application,
C.
§ 121-8 BARNSTABLE CODE § 121-9
115:172
§ 121-10. Fees.
The fee charged by the Police Department for the purpose of conducting
fingerprint-based criminal record background checks shall be $50. A
portion of the fee, as specified in MGL c. 6, § 172B 1/2, shall be deposited
into the Firearms Fingerprint Identity Verification Trust Fund, and the
remainder of the fee may be retained by the Town for costs associated with
the administration of the fingerprinting system.
§ 121-11. Severability.
The provision of this article is severable. If any provision shall be held to
be invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, the
remaining provisions shall remain in full force and effect.
including renewals and transfers thereof, for any person who is deemed
unfit for the license, as determined by the licensing authority, due to
information obtained pursuant to this article.
§ 121-9 HOURS OF OPERATION OF BUSINESSES § 121-11
115:173
Chapter 125
LOITERING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Noncriminal disposition — See Ch. 1, Art. I. Peace and good order — See Ch. 147.
§ 125-1. Loitering restricted.
No person shall saunter or loiter in a street in such manner as to obstruct
travelers, but nothing in this section shall be construed to curtail, abridge or
limit the right of opportunity of any person to exercise the right of peaceful
persuasion guaranteed by § 24 of Chapter 149 of the General Laws, or to
curtail, abridge or limit the intendment of any statute of the Commonwealth
of Massachusetts.
§ 125-2. Violations and penalties. [Added 5-18-1976, approved
9-13-1976]
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be punished
by a fine not to exceed $200 for each offense.
Chapter 128
MOTORIZED CONVEYANCES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Noncriminal enforcement of violations — See
Ch. 1, Art. I.
Storage of vehicles — See Ch. 228.
§ 128-1. Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words shall have the
following meanings:
MOTORIZED CONVEYANCE — Any wheeled device used to carry persons
or property which is powered by any means other than muscular power
alone, and which is not required by the laws of the Commonwealth to be
registered and insured as a motor vehicle.
EXEMPT MOTORIZED CONVEYANCE —
A. Railroad and railway cars;
Vehicles operated by the system known as trolley motor or trackless
trolley under the general laws;
B.
§ 121-11 BARNSTABLE CODE § 128-1
125:174
§ 128-2. Prohibition; exception.
§ 128-3. Rules and regulations.
The Town Manager may adopt rules and regulations to preserve and
promote the public safety, consistent with this article, governing the use
and rental of motorized conveyances within the Town. Such regulations
shall become effective when filed with the Town Clerk and published in a
newspaper having general circulation within the Town, and may include,
but need not be limited to, designation of the areas in which, or the times or
seasons during which, motorized conveyances may be used notwithstanding
this chapter.
§ 128-4. Violations and penalties.
Whoever violates the provisions of this chapter shall be punished by a fine
not to exceed $300.
§ 128-5. Seizure of improperly used motorized conveyances.
A police officer enforcing the provisions of this chapter may seize a
motorized conveyance which has been used improperly. A motorized
conveyance so seized may be held by the Police Department until final
disposition of any enforcement proceedings hereunder, including the
payment of any fine or noncriminal penalty.
C. Vehicles running only upon rails or tracks;
Vehicles used for purposes other than the transportation of property
and incapable of being driven at a speed exceeding twelve miles per
hour and which are used exclusively for the building, repair and
maintenance of highways or designed especially for use elsewhere than
on the traveled part of ways;
D.
E. Wheelchairs owned and operated by invalids; and
F. Vehicles which are operated or guided by a person on foot.
No person shall operate a motorized conveyance on the public ways
in the town, or on areas to which the public has a right of access,
without the prior written consent of the owner or person in control of
the property.
A.
B. This chapter shall not apply to exempt motorized conveyances.
§ 128-1 MOTORIZED CONVEYANCES § 128-5
128:175
Chapter 130
NEWSRACKS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Schedule of Fees — See Ch. 76, Art. II.
§ 130-1. License required.
It shall be unlawful for any person to place on any publicly owned property
within the Town, any newspaper boxes, newsracks, or news publication
vending devices without first obtaining a valid license for the location of
same from the Town Manager.
§ 130-2. Issuance of license by Town Manager.
The Town Manager shall, upon written application and payment of any
required fees, issue a license for the location of the installation and
operation of a newspaper box, newsrack or news publication vending
device, provided that the applicant submits evidence of compliance with the
requirements of § 130-3.
§ 130-3. Licensing requirements.
Requirements for licensing of newspaper boxes, newsracks and news
publication vending devices shall be as follows:
Applications must be submitted in writing on a form prescribed by the
Town Manager;
A.
The newspaper box, newsrack or news publication vending device must
not occupy an area greater than nine square feet, nor be more than 52
inches tall;
B.
The placement of the device shall not result in less than four feet of
pedestrian traffic width on the sidewalk;
C.
The placement of the device shall not be less than four feet from
any road surface, fire hydrant, U. S. postal receptacle or handicapped
person access ramp;
D.
The device shall be well maintained and shall have no sharp edges or
corners which would be likely to cause personal injury;
E.
The device must display information on the person responsible for the
operation of the device; said information must contain the name, street
address, city or town, state and zip code of the person responsible
for its maintenance and a telephone number for that person. The
information required by this subsection must be placed on the device
F.
§ 128-5 BARNSTABLE CODE § 130-3
130:176
§ 130-4. Issuance and posting of decal.
The Town Manager shall issue with every license for a newspaper box,
newsrack or newspaper publication vending device location a decal which
shall contain the license number and the license expiration date. Said decal
must be affixed to the device in such a manner as to make the decal visible
from the nearest street or public way.
§ 130-5. Period of license validity; fee.
All licenses issued under this chapter shall be valid for a period of not more
than 12 months from the date of issue. All licenses issued under this section
shall expire on March 31 following the date of issuance. The fee for each
new or renewal license shall be as provided in Chapter 76, Fees, Article II,
Schedule of Fees.
§ 130-6. Removal of nonconforming devices; claim procedure.
[Amended 5-6-1989, approved 6-30-1989]
Any newspaper box, newsrack, or news publication vending device found
on any publicly owned property within the Town without a valid decal, as
required in § 130-4, may be removed and stored by the Superintendent
of Public Works. The owner of any newspaper box, newsrack, or news
publication vending device so removed and stored may claim the unit from
the Superintendent of Public Works upon payment of reasonable storage
fees to be determined by the Public Works Commission.
§ 130-7. Violations and penalties. [Added 5-6-1989, approved
6-30-1989]
Any persons violating the provisions of this chapter shall be punished by a
fine not to exceed $200 for each offense.
Chapter 133
NOISE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Noncriminal disposition — See Ch. 1, Art. I.
Peace and good order — See Ch. 147.
Rental property — See Ch. 170.
Noise at marinas — See Ch. 405.
on the same side and as near as practical to any coin receiving element,
or on a device with no coin receiving element, the required information
shall be on the main display panel.
§ 130-3 NEWSRACKS § 133-1
130:177
§ 133-1. Responsibility for noise violations by person in charge of or
owning premises. [Amended 3-21-2013 by Order No. 2013-035]
It shall be unlawful for any person or persons occupying or having charge
of or owning any building, dwelling, structure, premises, shelter, boat or
conveyance or any part thereof in the Town, to cause or suffer to allow
any unnecessary, loud, excessive or unusual noises in the operation of any
radio, phonograph or other mechanical or electronic sound making device
or instrument, or reproducing device or instrument, or in the playing of any
band, orchestra, musician or group of musicians, or in the use of any device
to amplify the aforesaid, or the making of loud outcries, exclamations or
other loud or boisterous noises or loud and boisterous singing by any person
or group of persons or in the use of any device to amplify the aforesaid
noise, where the noise is plainly audible at a distance of 150 feet from
the building, dwelling, structure, premises, shelter, boat or conveyance in
which or from which it is produced. The fact that the noise is plainly audible
at a distance of 150 feet from the building, dwelling, structure, premises,
shelter, boat or conveyance from which it originates shall constitute prima
facie evidence of a violation of this chapter.
§ 133-2. Responsibility for noise violations by persons present on
premises.
It shall be unlawful for any person or persons being present in or about
any building, dwelling, structure, premises, shelter, boat or conveyance
or any part thereof, other than that section of any establishment licensed
under Chapter 138 of the General Laws, who, shall cause or suffer or
countenance any loud, unnecessary, excessive or unusual noises, including
any loud, unnecessary, excessive or unusual noises in the operation of any
radio, phonograph, or other mechanical or electronic sound making device,
or instrument or reproducing device or instrument or in the playing of
any band, orchestra, musician or group of musicians, or the making of
loud outcries, exclamations or other loud or boisterous noises or loud and
boisterous singing by any person or group of persons, or in the use of any
device to amplify the aforesaid noise, where the aforesaid noise is plainly
audible at a distance of 150 feet from the building, dwelling, structure,
premises, shelter, boat or conveyance in which or from which it is produced.
The fact that the noise is plainly audible at a distance of 150 feet from
the building, dwelling, structure, premises, shelter boat or conveyance from
which it originates shall constitute prima facie evidence of a violation of
this chapter. Any person shall be deemed in violation of this chapter, who
shall make, or aid, or cause, or suffer, or countenance, or assist in the
making of the aforesaid and described improper noises, disturbance, breach
of the peace, and the presence of any person or persons in or about the
building, dwelling, structure, premises, shelter, boat or conveyance or any
part thereof during a violation of this chapter shall constitute prima facie
evidence that they are a countenance to such violation.
§ 133-1 BARNSTABLE CODE § 133-3
130:178
§ 133-3. Noise from motor vehicles.
It shall be unlawful for any person while in control of any motor vehicle
in the Town of Barnstable to cause any unnecessary, loud, excessive, or
unusual noise in the operation of the motor vehicle. The fact that the noise is
plainly audible at a distance of 150 feet from the motor vehicle from which it
originates shall constitute prima facie evidence of a violation of this chapter.
§ 133-4. Notice of noise restrictions to be provided to renters;
owner's responsibility for repeated violations by renters. [Amended
3-21-2013 by Order No. 2013-035]
The owner of any building, dwelling, structure, premises, shelter, boat or
conveyance which is let, rented or leased shall provide any and all tenants,
lessees and sublessees with a copy of this chapter at the time of entering
into the rental agreement and the owner shall receive and retain a dated
written acknowledgement from each tenant, lessee and sublesseee verifying
receipt of same. The owner of any building, dwelling, structure, premises,
shelter, boat or conveyance which is let, rented or leased shall be notified in
writing of each violation of this chapter committed by his tenants, lessees
and sublessees. After notice of two such violations within a twelve-month
period, the Chief of Police or his designee may request a meeting with the
property owner to coordinate a plan to resolve the violations of this chapter.
If the owner fails to meet with the Chief or his designee or if after meeting
with the Chief or his designee, the owner fails to implement the plan to
resolve the violations, for each subsequent violation, the owner shall be
deemed to have suffered to allow noise in violation of § 133-1.
§ 133-5. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating the provisions of this chapter shall be punished by a
fine not to exceed $200 for each offense.
Chapter 138
OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Trees — See Ch. 221.
§ 133-3 OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES § 133-5
138:179

ARTICLE I
Tree Warden
[Adopted 5-8-1978, approved 8-25-1978 (Art. XXX of Ch. III of the
General Ordinances as updated through 7-7-2003)]
§ 138-1. Appointment; term.
The Town Manager shall annually in June appoint a Tree Warden to hold
office for the term of one year from July 1 to June 30 or until his successor
is duly appointed and qualified.
§ 138-2. Powers and duties.
The Tree Warden shall have and exercise all of the powers and duties
prescribed for a Tree Warden by the General Laws of this commonwealth.
§ 138-1 OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES § 138-2
138:181
Chapter 141
OUTDOOR BUSINESSES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Noncriminal disposition — See Ch. 1, Art. I. Schedule of Fees — See Ch. 76, Art. II.
§ 138-2 BARNSTABLE CODE § 138-2
141:182
ARTICLE I
Main Street in Hyannis and Osterville
[Adopted 3-5-1963, approved 5-6-1973 (Art. XVII of Ch. III of the
General Ordinances as updated through 7-7-2003)]
§ 141-1. Operation of businesses restricted. [Amended 1978 Fall
ATM; approved 2-6-1979]
Unless in a building, no business, professional or artistic enterprise shall
be conducted within 25 feet of the side lines of Main Street, Hyannis and
Main Street, Osterville. Notwithstanding the provisions of this article, the
Town Manager may issue a special permit for such activity if in his opinion
it would not be detrimental to the public interest or if in his opinion unusual
hardship would otherwise be incurred.
§ 141-2. Violations and penalties. [Added 5-18-1976; approved
9-13-1976]
Any such enterprise violating the provisions of this article shall be punished
by a fine not to exceed $50 for each offense. Each day that such violation
continues shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 141-1 OUTDOOR BUSINESSES § 141-2
141:183

ARTICLE II
Licensing
[Adopted 4-16-1992; amended 5-21-1992, 11-5-1992 (Art. LIII of
Ch. III of the General Ordinances as updated through 7-7-2003)]
§ 141-3. License required.
Unless in a building, no business, professional or artistic enterprise, shall be
conducted without first having obtained an outdoor business license from
the Town Manager.
§ 141-4. Nonapplicability.
The provisions of this article shall not apply to: amusements licensed under
Chapter 140 of the General Laws; agricultural enterprises; sale of fruits
and vegetables; flower and garden products and supplies when displayed
out of doors but sold from a building on the property maintained primarily
for that purpose; display of vehicles including rented or leased from a
building on the property maintained primarily for that purpose; recreational
activities; sporting events; building supplies where displayed out of doors
but sold from a building on the property maintained primarily for that
purpose; sale of newspapers and religious publications; licensed hunting
and fishing activities; appropriately authorized activities on Town-owned
property; construction and maintenance of buildings, property, roads,
sidewalks, etc.; activities or a restaurant when properly licensed;
transportation activities; fueling and refueling activities; licensed kennels
and stables; communications activities; unauthorized activities of a properly
licensed hawker or peddler; activities of public utilities; collection and
disposal of waste; or the display of merchandise when displayed out of doors
but sold from a building maintained primarily for this purpose.
§ 141-5. No relief from compliance due to temporary association
with local dealers.
No person shall be relieved or exempted from the provisions of this article
by reason of associating himself temporarily with any local dealer, trader or
merchant, or by lease of all or part of a parcel of land, or by conducting his
business in connection with, or as part of, the business of, or in the name of,
any local dealer, trader or merchant.
§ 141-6. License fee; expiration; charitable organizations;
Christmas tree sales.
The fee for an outdoor business license shall be as set forth in Chapter 76,
Fees, Article II, Schedule of Fees. The fee for an outdoor business license
when issued after October 15 shall be as provided in Chapter 76, Fees,
Article II, Schedule of Fees. Licenses issued under this article shall expire
on December 31 annually. The Town Manager may, under such conditions as
he may deem proper, grant to any organization engaged in charitable work,
a special license authorizing it, for a particular time period not to exceed a
§ 141-3 OUTDOOR BUSINESSES § 141-6
141:185
total of four days, to be stated in the license, and for a charitable purpose
stated in such license, to conduct under their control an outdoor business,
professional, or artistic enterprise for a fee as set forth in Chapter 76,
Fees, Article II, Schedule of Fees, provided that the applicant demonstrates
a substantial benefit to the charity and to the Town. The Town Manager
may issue a special license for charitable purposes authorizing the sale of
Christmas trees for a period not to exceed 45 days.
§ 141-7. Power of Town Manager to place restrictions on license.
The Town Manager may make regulations not inconsistent with the
provisions of this article for clarifying the provisions of this article and to
describe the methods, conditions, and form of application, and may place
reasonable restrictions on any license granted under this article when, in
his opinion, it is in the best interest of the Town of Barnstable to do so.
§ 141-8. Violations and penalties.
Whoever violates the provisions of this article shall be punished by a fine
not to exceed $300. Any violation of this article enforced by the methods
provided in § 21D of Chapter 40 of the General Laws shall be subject to
a fine of $100. Each day that such violation continues shall constitute a
separate offense.
§ 141-6 BARNSTABLE CODE § 141-8
141:186
Chapter 147
PEACE AND GOOD ORDER
GENERAL REFERENCES
Noncriminal disposition — See Ch. 1, Art. I.
Open containers of alcoholic beverages — See
Ch. 20, Art. II.
Gambling — See Ch. 89.
Loitering — See Ch. 125.
Noise — See Ch. 133.
§ 141-8 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 141-8
147:187

ARTICLE I
Profane or Obscene Language
[Adopted 3-5-1968, approved 5-13-1968 (Art. XXIV of Ch. III of the
General Ordinances as updated through 7-7-2003)]
§ 147-1. Obscene language in public prohibited.
No person shall, in any street or other public place, accost or address
another person with profane or obscene language.
§ 147-2. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating any portion of this article shall be punished by a fine
not more than $50 for each offense.
§ 147-1 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 147-2
147:189

ARTICLE II
Camping
[Adopted 5-18-1976, approved 9-13-1976 (Art. XXIII of Ch. III of the
General Ordinances as updated through 7-7-2003)]
§ 147-3. Tenting and camping restricted; sleeping on public
property prohibited.
No person shall set up on any property, public or private, without
permission of the owner thereof, a camp or tent, nor shall any person
between the hours of 8:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. sleep in the open on any
public property, within the limits of the Town of Barnstable.
§ 147-4. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating this provision of this article shall be punished by a fine
not to exceed $200 for each offense.
§ 147-3 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 147-4
147:191

ARTICLE III
Protection of Privacy
[Adopted 6-12-1975, approved 9-10-1975 (Art. X of Ch. III of the
General Ordinances as updated through 7-7-2003)]
§ 147-5. Peeping in windows prohibited.
No person shall enter upon the premises of another with the intention of
peeping into the windows of a house or other building or in any manner
spying upon any person or persons therein.
§ 147-6. Permit required for door-to-door solicitation; exceptions.
[Added 5-18-1976, approved 9-13-1976]
There shall be no door-to-door solicitation in the Town of Barnstable by any
person, other than a bona fide agent of a recognized religious, charitable,
fraternal or nonprofit public service organization, without such person
having first registered his true name and address with the Chief of Police
and having stated fully the true purposes and duration of such solicitation.
Upon such true representation, the Chief of Police shall issue a permit
stating that such person has so registered and is entitled to solicit for the
purposes specified.
§ 147-7. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate this article shall be punished by a fine of not
more than $50 for each offense.
§ 147-5 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 147-7
147:193

ARTICLE IV
Child Safety Information and Awareness
[Adopted 11-2-2006 by Order No. 2007-3517]
§ 147-8. Title.
This article shall be known as the "Barnstable Active Safety Information
for Child Awareness Ordinance" and may be referred to by the acronym
"BASIC."
§ 147-9. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to advance the public safety and welfare of
the residents of the Town of Barnstable by making certain environmental
information and controls available for the benefit of children and those who
care for children.
§ 147-10. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CHILD — A person under the age of 16.
RESIDENCE — The place of abode of a person.
§ 147-11. Information.
§ 147-12. Controls.
The Town will make available by publication on its Web site and in
one of its offices, public records that chronicle areas where hazardous
materials, as defined in § 2 of Chapter 21E of the General Laws of
Massachusetts, have been released and the status of remedial actions
updated semiannually until final response actions have been taken and
thereafter maintain the record of such final response for a period of
three years.
A.
The Town will make available by publication on its Web site and in one
of its offices, public records on motor vehicle collisions on ways within
the Town updated semiannually.
B.
The Town will make available by publication on its Web site any reports
received by the Health Division from the Commonwealth of
Massachusetts Department of Public Health of the presence of Eastern
Equine Encephalitis within the Town for a period of 30 days.
C.
The Town will post a sign on any of its property listed for publication
under § 147-11A containing a summary of the published information.
A.
17.Editor's Note: This ordinance also stated that it shall take effect 90 days following its
adoption.
§ 147-8 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 147-12
147:195
§ 147-13. Violations and penalties.
Violations of § 147-12 shall be punishable by a fine of $300 per day.
§ 147-14. Severability.
The invalidity of any section or provision of this article shall not invalidate
any other section or provision thereof.
Following each data update completed pursuant to § 147-11B, the Town
will review motor vehicle traffic rules, regulations and improvements
for the purpose of considering amendments or additional improvements
designed to alleviate the occurrence of future similar incidents.
B.
No person designated as level 2 or 3 under the provisions of MGL c.
6, § 178K(2), in whole or in part by reason of a sexual offense against
a child shall take up residence apart from a person related by blood
or marriage within the first degree of kindred within the Town within
2,000 feet of the boundaries of land containing a facility with the
principal purpose of providing services to a child.
C.
A person does not commit a violation of Subsection C if any of the
following apply:
The person is required to serve a sentence at a jail, prison, juvenile
facility or other correctional institution or facility; or
(1)
The person had already established residence as of the effective
date of the prohibitions.
(2)
D.
§ 147-12 BARNSTABLE CODE § 147-14
147:196
Chapter 150
PEDDLING AND HAWKING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Noncriminal disposition — See Ch. 1, Art. I.
§ 150-1. License required.
No person shall conduct the activity of a hawker or peddler unless licensed
in compliance with M.G.L. Chapter 101 and the provisions of this chapter.
§ 150-2. Location restrictions.
No hawking or peddling activity required to be licensed by M.G.L. Chapter
101 shall be permitted within 150 feet of North Street, Main Street and
South Street in Hyannis, or within 150 feet of any Town-operated beach or
park, unless a license has been authorized in accordance with § 150-3.
§ 150-3. Sales by nonprofit agencies.
The Town Manager may grant a license authorizing sales by nonprofit
agencies, to sell through its agents, in the streets and other public places
within the Town identified on the license. The license shall be for a period
not to exceed 12 hours. A nonprofit agency authorized by this section to sell
shall provide each agent a badge, approved by the Town Manager, bearing
upon it the name of the organization and the date and location on which the
license is to be exercised. Each authorized agent shall wear in plain sight
the badge provided by the authorized agency during the period the agent
is engaged in this authorized activity. The Town Manager shall have the
authority to adopt rules and regulations consistent with M.G.L. Chapter 101
and this chapter to further regulate the activities of hawkers and peddlers.
§ 150-4. Selling goods in public ways.
No hawker or peddler shall set up and display or sell goods, wares or
merchandise adjacent to any pubic way, except a properly licensed hawker
or peddler may stop a vehicle on a public way and offer or sell goods, wares
or merchandise to persons who have signaled an interest in the services,
and provided, further, that the hawker or peddler does not obstruct the
normal flow of traffic or endanger vehicle or pedestrian traffic. A hawker
or peddler set up adjacent to any public way displaying goods, wares or
merchandise for a period of more than five minutes without a customer or
potential customer displaying interest in the goods, wares or merchandise
shall be deemed to be in violation of this section.
§ 147-14 PEDDLING AND HAWKING § 150-5
150:197
§ 150-5. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating the provisions of this chapter shall be punished by a
fine of not more than $300 for each offense. Any violation of this chapter
enforced by the methods provided in § 21D of Chapter 40 of the General
Laws shall be subject to a fine of $100 for each offense.
Chapter 160
PROBLEM PROPERTIES, CHRONIC
GENERAL REFERENCES
Peace and good order — See Ch. 147.
§ 160-1. Purpose and intent.
The purpose and intent of this chapter is to define a coherent method of
addressing the adverse effects on the health, safety, welfare, and quality of
life of residents arising from properties where illegal activity occurs on a
regular basis. Some persons that own or control such properties allow their
properties to be used for illegal activity, with the result that these properties
have become chronic problem properties in the neighborhood. Chronic
problem properties within the Town of Barnstable cause a financial burden
by the numerous calls for service to the properties because of the illegal
activities that repeatedly occur or exist on such properties. The current
provisions of the ordinances relating to noise and disturbing the peace do
not provide an adequate tool for abating such chronic problem properties.
The Town through its public safety, code enforcement and regulatory
agencies is in a unique position to gather data on such properties and to
establish an active plan tailored to address the particularized problems and
costs posed by specific properties.
§ 160-2. Cost of assigned police officers.
Authority for police response. Where Police Department personnel,
while on duty in service to the Department, are dispatched or caused to
respond at a particular dwelling unit, property or location on multiple
occasions, to incidents involving criminal offenses, whether a
misdemeanor or felony under federal, state or local law, the Chief of
Police is hereby authorized and empowered to assign to such dwelling
unit, property or location a member or members of the department to
staff such police response as the Chief of Police deems appropriate to
protect the health, safety, and welfare of the inhabitants of the Town of
Barnstable.
A.
Requirements for police response. Such assignment of a police
response shall only occur after the following procedure has been
satisfied:
B.
§ 150-5 BARNSTABLE CODE § 160-2
150:198
Upon being dispatched or caused to respond to an incident at a
property involving a misdemeanor or a felony, Police Department
personnel shall investigate the validity of the complaint against the
occupants at the particular property or location.
(1)
Upon finding a valid complaint, police shall make a record of the
incident and shall mail a copy of this chapter and copies of the
all-calls reports relating to said police response to the property
owner by certified mail. A "valid complaint," "incident" or "felony
or misdemeanor," as used in this chapter, shall not include a
complaint, incident or offense where an occupant of the premises
is the victim of the crime.
(2)
The Police Department shall make a record of the number of such
incidents at a particular dwelling unit, property or location and
keep such record within the Department's control.
(3)
After two valid complaint incidents in a twelve-month period
relating to the occupancy of a dwelling unit, or to a particular
property or location, the Chief of Police or his designee may
request a meeting with the property owner to coordinate a plan
to resolve the incidents at the particular property. For the purpose
of calculating the number of such incidents, where a particular
property contains more than one single dwelling unit, providing
complete independent living facilities for one or more persons,
including provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking and
sanitation, a valid complaint incident shall be attributable to any
single unit where the valid complaint incident has been
documented, and not to the entire multiple-unit property.
(4)
After the four valid complaint incidents, whether misdemeanor or
felony, in a twelve-month period, relating to the property owner,
tenants or occupants of a dwelling unit or at a particular property
or location, the Chief of Police shall schedule a meeting with the
property owner and after the hearing, at his/her discretion, may
make the decision to designate the property as a chronic problem
property and assign a police response.
Factors that shall be considered by the Chief of Police include
the following:
[1] The nature, scope, and seriousness of the incident(s);
[2] Whether incident(s) resulted in an arrest;
History of criminal activity taking place at the property or
dwelling unit;
[3]
Property owners' and tenants'/occupants' willingness to
cooperate with police.
[4]
(a)
(5)
§ 160-2 PEDDLING AND HAWKING § 160-2
150:199
The Chief of Police shall notify, in writing, the property owner
of his decision to designate the property as a chronic problem
property and to assign police response as follows:
If the property owner resides within the Town of
Barnstable, such notification should be hand delivered to
the property owner's residence or usual place of business
that is on record at the Assessor's office and by mailing the
notification to such address by regular and certified mail,
return receipt requested; or
[1]
If the property owner does not reside within the Town
of Barnstable, by mailing the notification to the property
owner's residence or usual place of business that is on
record at the Assessor's office by regular and certified
mail, return receipt requested.
[2]
The Chief of Police's notification must inform the property
owner that he/she may request, in writing, a hearing,
within 14 days of the notification, from the Chief of Police
and where and to whom he/she must address his/her letter
of appeal, specified under § 160-2D.
[3]
The notification shall contain the number of valid
complaint incidents which occurred on said property in a
twelve-month period.
[4]
(b)
After the hearing under Subsection B(5) above, the property may
be officially identified as a chronic problem property, and the
property owner shall be subject to the penalties addressed in
Subsection C. The Chief of Police may commence assigning police
response seven days after hand delivery of the notification and 10
days after mailing the notification to the property owner.
(6)
The Chief of Police or his designee shall keep an accurate record
of the cost of police response to a particular property or location,
including an accurate record of the number of officers who are part
of the determined response; and the Chief of Police shall forward
such record to the Collector.
(7)
Coordination of police response is subject to the rules and
regulations of the Department.
(8)
Penalties.
The Collector is hereby authorized and empowered to notify and
bill the property owner for the costs the Town incurred for its police
response in addition to any incidental costs during the period
of police response to the dwelling unit, particular property or
location. The property owner is responsible for payment of the bill
in full within 30 days of receiving the bill, unless an appeal under
(1)
C.
§ 160-2 BARNSTABLE CODE § 160-2
150:200
§ 160-2D is timely filed. All amounts collected by the Collector shall
be deposited into the general fund of the Town.
Any unpaid bill for police response, including interest and/or
collection costs, shall be added to the real estate tax on the
property and collected as part of that tax. Failure to pay real estate
taxes will render the property owner delinquent, and the Collector
shall commence foreclosure proceedings.
(2)
Property owner's rights. The property owner may request, in writing,
a hearing before the Problem Properties Appeals Committee within 14
days of receipt of notification in order to appeal the designation of the
property as a chronic problem property under § 160-2B(6) and/or to
contest any penalties set forth in § 160-2C. A decision on the appeal
must be in writing. If the Committee finds that the property is not a
chronic problem property, the designation shall be removed and any
penalties assessed shall be rescinded. If the Committee finds that the
property is a chronic problem property, it may 1) uphold the penalty in
its entirety or 2) reduce the penalty or 3) abate any portion thereof that
has already been paid.
D.
Eviction. In the event the property owner has commenced the process
of eviction against the tenant(s) responsible for the incidents at the
property, and demonstrates that he has proceeded diligently and in
good faith, then the application of this chapter shall be stayed until the
eviction process is concluded. The Chief of Police may continue police
response at the particular property or location, at his discretion, at
all times after the eviction proceeding has been completed; provided,
however, that such costs shall not be assessed to the property owner.
E.
Charges to constitute municipal lien pursuant to MGL c. 40, § 58. All
charges to recover costs imposed in this chapter shall constitute a
municipal lien on the property so charged in accordance with MGL c.
40, § 58.
F.
Reporting requirements. The Chief of Police shall submit a written
report to the Town Manager and Town Council, no later than six months
after the effective date of this chapter, which shall include the total
cost of administration of this chapter, as well as an accounting of all
revenues collected in association with it. It shall also contain data
regarding all dwelling units within a property, particular properties
or locations which remain chronic problem properties and those that
are no longer designated as chronic problem properties. The report
shall also include the general impact, if any, that the implementation of
this chapter has had on the health, safety, and welfare of' residents of
Barnstable.
G.
Definitions.
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, corporation, firm, association,
or group, including a governmental unit and the Town of Barnstable or
any of its agencies.
H.
§ 160-2 PEDDLING AND HAWKING § 160-2
150:201
Chapter 162
PUBLIC HEARINGS
POLICE RESPONSE — Any and all police action deemed appropriate
by the Chief of Police to protect the health, safety and welfare of
inhabitants of a property or location where valid complaints have been
documented.
PROPERTY OWNER — Any person who alone or severally with others
has legal title to any building, structure, property, dwelling, dwelling
unit(s), rooming unit or parcel of land, vacant or otherwise; mortgagee
in possession; or agent, trustee or other person appointed by the courts.
VALID COMPLAINT — An investigated finding, documented by on-duty
Police Department personnel dispatched or caused to respond to an
incident, that a misdemeanor, felony under federal, state or local law
has taken place in a dwelling unit, within a property, on a particular
property or at a specific location which disturbs the health, safety and
welfare of other inhabitants of said property or location. The term shall
not include incidents involving an occupant of the premises as the
victim of the crime.
§ 160-2 BARNSTABLE CODE § 160-2
162:202
ARTICLE I
Hearings on Ordinances
[Adopted 4-6-2000 by Order No. 2000-126 (Art. VI of Ch. I of the
General Ordinances as updated through 7-7-2003)]
§ 162-1. Public hearings required.
The Council shall hold a public hearing on any proposed general ordinance
or amendment thereto.
§ 162-2. Notice of hearing.
Notice of such hearings shall be published in the same manner as
appropriation orders under the Charter.
§ 162-1 PUBLIC HEARINGS § 162-2
162:203

ARTICLE II
Notification of Public Hearings
[Adopted 12-6-2001 by Order No. 2002-034 (Art. XXII of Ch. II of
the General Ordinances as updated through 7-7-2003)]
§ 162-3. Delivery to address of property affected.
Whenever a notice of a public hearing is required to be mailed to the
owner of a parcel of real estate, a copy of said notice shall also be sent to
"occupant" at the local street address of the affected property, if different
from the property tax billing address.
§ 162-3 PUBLIC HEARINGS § 162-3
162:205
Chapter 166
RAFFLES AND BAZAARS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Noncriminal disposition — See Ch. I, Art. I. Gambling — See Ch. 89.
§ 166-1. Compliance with state and local laws required.
No person shall operate a raffle or bazaar in the Town of Barnstable except
in accordance with § 7A of Chapter 271 of the General Laws, 961 Code of
Massachusetts Regulations, Sections 4.00 - 4.05, and this article.
§ 166-2. Application information.
§ 166-3. Written notice of event required.
No person holding a permit to operate raffles or bazaars shall operate any
particular such event unless written notice has been given to the Chief of
Police, not less than 30 days prior to the event, of the date, time, and place
of the event and of any deviation from the information contained in the
application for the permit to operate the same.
§ 166-4. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating any provisions of this chapter shall be punished by a
fine of not more than $300.
Chapter 168
Each application for a permit to operate raffles and bazaars shall be
accompanied by a document setting forth the following information:
(1) The evidence on which the applicant relies in order to qualify.
The names, addresses and phone numbers of three officers or
members of the organization who shall be responsible for the
operation of the bazaar or raffle.
(2)
(3) The uses to which the net proceeds will be applied.
Names, addresses and phone numbers of persons leasing gaming
equipment to the organization.
(4)
A current list of members of the organization together with their
addresses.
(5)
A.
No person other than an officer or a member specifically authorized
to do so shall sign an application for a permit to operate raffles and
bazaars on behalf of an organization.
B.
§ 162-3 BARNSTABLE CODE § 166-4
166:206
REGULATORY AGREEMENTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Zoning — See Ch. 240.
§ 168-1. Purpose and intent; legislative authority; boundary; singlefamily
residence exception. [Amended 5-24-2007 by Order No.
2007-105; 7-16-2009 by Order No. 2009-138; 7-12-2012 by Order
No. 2012-152; 2-1-2018 by Order No. 2018-054]
It is the purpose and intent of this chapter to enable the Town of Barnstable
to enter into development agreements (hereinafter "regulatory
agreements") in the areas delineated on the Regulatory Agreement Districts
Map dated January 2, 2018.18
§ 168-2. Definitions.
In this chapter, the following words have the meanings indicated:
DESIGN AND INFRASTRUCTURE PLAN — The plan established by the
Barnstable Zoning Ordinance, § 240-24.1.11.
QUALIFIED APPLICANT — A person who has a majority legal or equitable
interest in the real property which is the subject of the regulatory
agreement. A qualified applicant may be represented by an authorized
agent.
REGULATORY AGREEMENT — A contract entered into between the Cape
Cod Commission and/ or the Town of Barnstable and a holder of property
The Town of Barnstable adopts this chapter under the Home Rule
Authority of Article 89 of the amendments to the Massachusetts
Constitution, the provisions of the Cape Cod Commission Act, Chapter
716 of the Acts of 1989, as amended, and Chapter D, Development
Agreement Regulations, Code of Cape Cod Commission Regulations of
General Application.
A.
This chapter shall apply within the Regulatory Agreement Districts,
shown on the Regulatory Agreement Districts Map dated January 2,
2018.19
B.
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to any single-family
structure in existence on the date of adoption of this chapter that is
used as a primary residence by the owner or a family member of the
owner, as the term "family member" is defined in the Barnstable Zoning
Ordinance.20
C.
18.Editor's Note: Said map is on file in the Town offices.
19.Editor's Note: Said map is on file in the Town offices.
20.Editor's Note: See Ch. 240, Zoning.
§ 166-4 RAFFLES AND BAZAARS § 168-2
166:207
development rights, the principal purpose of which is to negotiate and to
establish the development regulations that will apply to the subject property
during the term of the agreement and to establish the conditions to which
the development will be subject including, without limitation, a schedule of
impact fees and/or transfer development rights.
TOWN OF BARNSTABLE — The municipality where the proposed
development is located. The Town Manager, or his or her designee, shall
be authorized to execute, on behalf of the Town of Barnstable, a regulatory
agreement, subject to the procedural requirements set forth below.
§ 168-3. Authority to enter agreement.
Notwithstanding provisions to the contrary, the Town of Barnstable is
hereby authorized to enter into a regulatory agreement with a qualified
applicant within the Downtown Implementation District, provided the
following conditions are met:
§ 168-4. Parties to regulatory agreements.
A regulatory agreement may be executed by and between a qualified
applicant and:
§ 168-5. Negotiation and execution of regulatory agreements.
The Town's Local Comprehensive Plan has been certified by the Cape
Cod Commission as consistent with the Regional Policy Plan, and said
certification has not been revoked;
A.
The Town has adopted the enabling regulation contained in §§ 168-1
through 168-10, herein.
B.
A. The Cape Cod Commission; or
B. The Cape Cod Commission and the Town of Barnstable; or
The Cape Cod Commission and the Town of Barnstable and with a state
agency or agencies; or
C.
D. The Town of Barnstable; or
E. The Town of Barnstable and a state agency or agencies.
Negotiation of the elements of a regulatory agreement between
authorized parties (§ 168-4) and a qualified applicant shall follow all
pertinent rules of due process currently required for public meetings,
public hearings, and ratification of board and council decisions.
A.
Negotiation of the elements of a regulatory agreement between
authorized parties (§ 168-4) and a qualified applicant shall be led by the
Planning Board or its designee and shall include representatives from
other municipal boards, departments and commissions where said joint
participation will assist the negotiation process.
B.
§ 168-2 BARNSTABLE CODE § 168-5
166:208
§ 168-6. Elements of regulatory agreements.
No regulatory agreement may be executed by the Town Manager prior
to an affirmative, majority vote by the Planning Board and the Town
Council recommending the execution of the regulatory agreement.
When a waiver from zoning is allowed under the negotiated regulatory
agreement, there shall be a two-thirds vote of the Town Council
recommending execution of the regulatory agreement.
C.
The Town Manager may make minor amendments to the regulatory
agreement recommended by the Planning Board and approved by the
Town Council and execute said regulatory agreement as amended,
provided that such amendments do not alter the use, intensity or
mitigation stipulations of the regulatory agreement. However, in no
instance may the Town Manager make substantial amendments to the
regulatory agreement recommended by the Planning Board and
approved by the Town Council without first receiving written
concurrence from the Planning Board and the Town Council and
qualified applicant that said substantial amendments are agreed to.
D.
The Town Manager or his/her designee shall be authorized to execute,
on behalf of the Town, a regulatory agreement. Prior to executing said
regulatory agreement, the Town Manager shall obtain a majority vote
of the Town Council to authorize the execution, unless the regulatory
agreement authorizes a waiver from the Barnstable Zoning Ordinance,
in which case the Town Manager shall obtain a two-thirds majority vote
of the Town Council to authorize the execution. The Town Manager
shall, within seven days of the Town Council vote authorizing the
execution of the regulatory agreement, cause said regulatory
agreement to be so executed and forward the same to the qualified
applicant by certified, return receipt, mail. Within 21 days of the date
said regulatory agreement has been mailed by the Town Manager, the
qualified applicant shall execute the agreement and return, either by
certified mail or hand delivery, the fully executed regulatory agreement.
E.
Proffers by a qualified applicant. A regulatory agreement may include,
but is not limited to, the provisions whereby a qualified applicant
agrees to provide certain benefits which contribute to one or more of
the following:
(1) The Town's infrastructure.
(2) Public capital facilities.
(3) Land dedication and/ or preservation.
(4) Affordable housing, either on or off site.
(5) Employment opportunities.
(6) Community facilities.
A.
§ 168-5 RAFFLES AND BAZAARS § 168-6
166:209
§ 168-7. Procedural requirements where Cape Cod Commission is
party to agreement.
§ 168-8. Procedural requirements where Cape Cod Commission is
not party to agreement.
(7) Recreational facilities.
(8) Alternative mass transportation.
Any other benefit intended to serve the proposed development,
municipality or county, including site design standards, to ensure
preservation of community character and natural resources.
(9)
Proffers by the Town of Barnstable. A regulatory agreement may
include the provisions whereby the Town of Barnstable agrees to
provide certain protection from future changes in applicable local
regulations and assistance in streamlining the local regulatory approval
process. Streamlining will include, where not in conflict with existing
local, state or federal law, holding of joint hearings, coordination of
permit applications and, where possible, accelerated review of permit
approvals. A regulatory agreement may also provide for extensions of
time within which development approvals under state, regional and
local laws may be extended to coincide with the expiration of the
regulatory agreement established in § 168-9, below. When the Cape
Cod Commission is not a party to the regulatory agreement, the land
use development rights shall not vest with respect to Cape Cod
Commission regulations and designations and the property shall be
subject to subsequent changes in the Commission's regulations and
designations.
B.
Where the Cape Cod Commission is to be a party to a regulatory
agreement, a qualified applicant shall complete a regulatory agreement
application form and comply with the specific requirements set forth
in Section 5 of Chapter D of the Code of Cape Cod Commission
Regulations of General Application, as revised.
A.
Where the Cape Cod Commission is to be a party to a regulatory
agreement, the procedural requirements established in Section 5 of
Chapter D of the Code of Cape Cod Commission Regulations of General
Application, as revised, shall be followed, and no such regulatory
agreement shall be valid unless and until the requirements of said
Section 5 of Chapter D have been complied with in full.
B.
Where the Cape Cod Commission is not to be a party to a regulatory
agreement, a qualified applicant shall complete a regulatory agreement
application form. The regulatory agreement application form shall
include:
A fully completed application form provided by the Town of
Barnstable, including a certified list of abutters.
(1)
A.
§ 168-6 BARNSTABLE CODE § 168-8
166:210
A legal description of the land subject to the agreement and the
names of its legal and equitable owners.
(2)
(3) The proposed duration of the agreement.
The development uses currently permitted on the land, and
development uses proposed on the land, including population
densities, and building densities and height.
(4)
A description of public facilities that will service the development,
including who shall provide and pay for such facilities, the date any
new facilities will be constructed, and a schedule to assure that
public facilities adequate to serve the development are available
concurrent with the impacts of the development.
(5)
A description of any reservation or dedication of land for public
purposes.
(6)
A description of all local development permits approved or needed
to be approved for the development of the land.
(7)
A statement indicating that the failure of the agreement to address
a particular permit, condition, term, or restriction shall not relieve
the qualified applicant of the necessity of complying with the law
governing said permitting requirements, conditions, term or
restriction.
(8)
A final environmental impact report, certified as adequate by the
Secretary of Environmental Affairs, if required under MGL c. 30,
§§ 61 through 62h.
(9)
Additional data and analysis necessary to assess the impact of the
proposed development, as determined by the Town of Barnstable.
(10)
All qualified applicants seeking to enter into a regulatory agreement
without the Cape Cod Commission as a party shall submit the proposed
development to the Barnstable Building Commissioner for a
jurisdictional determination. If the Barnstable Building Commissioner
determines that the proposed development is not a development of
regional impact, then the Building Commissioner shall forward his or
her determination, together with the reasons for such determination
and a copy of the regulatory agreement application form, to the Clerk
of the Cape Cod Commission within five business days. If the proposed
development is not a development of regional impact, then the qualified
applicant may pursue a regulatory agreement without the Cape Cod
Commission as a party pursuant to the provisions of § 168-8C through
I, below. If the proposed development is a development of regional
impact, then the Cape Cod Commission must be a party to the
regulatory agreement, in which case, the provisions of Section 5 of
Chapter D of the Code of Cape Cod Commission Regulations of General
Application, as revised, shall apply.
B.
§ 168-8 RAFFLES AND BAZAARS § 168-8
166:211
The Town of Barnstable shall assume the responsibility for overseeing
the regulatory agreement process. The Town of Barnstable shall hold
a public hearing after receipt of a fully completed application from
a qualified applicant for consideration of a proposed regulatory
agreement. The Town of Barnstable shall hold at least two public
hearings. The public hearings regarding review of a regulatory
agreement shall not exceed 60 days, unless extended by mutual
agreement of the parties. Failure to close the public hearings within
60 days shall not result in a constructive grant of the proposed
development.
C.
The Town of Barnstable shall provide notice of the public hearing to
consider a regulatory agreement by publication in a newspaper of
general circulation once in each of two successive weeks, the first
publication to be not less than 14 days before the day of the hearing,
and by mailing notice not less than 14 days before to:
The Town Council, Town Manager, Town Clerk, Building Inspector,
Planning Board, Board of Appeals, Conservation Commission,
Board of Health, Historic District Commission, Housing Authority,
and to any other Town agency or any individual that makes a
written request for such notice;
(1)
(2) The applicant;
Each abutter to the proposed development, based on a list of
abutters provided by the applicant and certified by the Barnstable
Tax Assessor. Abutters shall include owners of land directly
opposite on any public or private street or way and owners of
land located within 300 feet of any boundary of the proposed
development; and
(3)
(4) The Cape Cod Commission.
D.
The qualified applicant shall bear the cost of providing notice of the
public hearing to consider the proposed regulatory agreement.
E.
The Town of Barnstable shall review proposed regulatory agreements
for their consistency with the Cape Cod Commission Act, the Design
and Infrastructure Plan and the Barnstable Local Comprehensive Plan.
F.
The Town of Barnstable shall file its regulatory agreement with the
Clerk of the Cape Cod Commission and with the Barnstable Town Clerk.
Notices of regulatory agreements shall be published in a newspaper
of general circulation in the Town of Barnstable, including a brief
summary of the contents of the regulatory agreement and a statement
that copies of the regulatory agreement are available for public
inspection at the Barnstable Town Clerk's office during normal business
hours. In addition, the Town of Barnstable shall provide the Cape Cod
Commission with a summary of the regulatory agreement which the
Cape Cod Commission shall publish in its official publication pursuant
to Section 5(i) of the Cape Cod Commission Act.
G.
§ 168-8 BARNSTABLE CODE § 168-8
166:212
§ 168-9. Limitations on regulatory agreements.
§ 168-10. Amendments and rescission.
Regulatory agreements shall be issued in a form suitable for recording
in the Barnstable County Registry of Deeds. The Town of Barnstable
shall record the regulatory agreement in the Barnstable County
Registry of Deeds and shall submit proof of such recording to the Town
Clerk and the Cape Cod Commission Clerk within 14 days of such
recording. The qualified applicant shall bear the expense of recording.
H.
The cost for filing and processing of each regulatory agreement shall be
as established by the Town Manager during his annual public hearing
on the Town's fee schedule, except that the Town Manager may
establish temporary fees to apply from the effective date of this chapter
until the next annual public hearing on Town fees.
I.
Nothing in this chapter may be construed to permit a municipality to
require a qualified applicant to enter into a regulatory agreement.
A.
A regulatory agreement will commence and terminate as agreed by the
parties, in writing, except as otherwise provided in this section. Where
the Cape Cod Commission is not a party, a regulatory agreement shall
not exceed 10 years; however, provisions in the regulatory agreement
pertaining to the preservation of open space and park areas, and
agreement to pay for maintenance of utilities and other infrastructure
may exceed such ten-year limitation. Where the Cape Cod Commission
is a party, a regulatory agreement may extend for a longer period of
time than that noted above, as set forth in Section 7 of the Code of Cape
Cod Commission Regulations of General Application, as revised.
B.
A regulatory agreement may not be used to prevent the Town of
Barnstable or other governmental agency from requiring a qualified
applicant to comply with the laws, rules and regulations and policies
enacted after the date of the regulatory agreement, if the Town of
Barnstable or governmental agency determines that the imposition
of and compliance with the newly effective laws and regulations are
essential to ensure the public health, safety or welfare of the residents
of all or part of the jurisdiction.
C.
Where the Cape Cod Commission is not a party to the regulatory
agreement, any party to the agreement may petition the Town of
Barnstable to amend or rescind the regulatory agreement. The
petitioning party shall provide notice to all parties to the agreement and
to the Cape Cod Commission of its intention to amend or rescind the
agreement by providing such parties with a copy of the petition seeking
such amendment or rescission. When the Town of Barnstable initiates
an amendment or rescission, it shall provide notice, in writing, to all
other parties to the agreement and to the Cape Cod Commission. The
process for amendment or rescission shall follow the procedures for
adoption outlined above.
A.
§ 168-8 RAFFLES AND BAZAARS § 168-10
166:213
§ 168-11. Enforcement.
A regulatory agreement is a binding contract which is enforceable in law or
equity by a Massachusetts court of competent jurisdiction.
§ 168-12. Severability; effect on other laws.
Chapter 170
RENTAL PROPERTIES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Noncriminal enforcement of violations — See
Ch. 1, Art. I.
Fees — See Ch. 76.
Noise — See Ch. 133.
Solid waste — See Ch. 202.
§ 170-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to protect the health, safety, and welfare of
both the occupant(s) of rental housing units and the general public and to
maintain the quality of life in residential neighborhoods. It will assist the
Board of Health in the enforcement of state and local health and safety
laws or regulations and provide a method of correcting violations when
conditions require immediate attention, in particular, situations associated
with recreational tenancy.
When the Cape Cod Commission is a party to the regulatory agreement,
any other party to the regulatory agreement may petition the
Commission to amend or rescind the regulatory agreement. Such
petition shall be made in writing, on a form provided by the Cape Cod
Commission. The petitioning party shall provide notice to all parties
to the regulatory agreement and to the Commission of its intention
to amend or rescind the agreement by providing such parties and the
Commission with a copy of the petition seeking such amendment or
rescission. When the Commission initiates an amendment or rescission,
it shall provide advanced notice, in writing, to all other parties to the
agreement. The process for amendment or rescission shall follow the
procedures for adoption outlined above.
B.
If any provision of this chapter is held invalid by a court of competent
jurisdiction, the remainder of the ordinance shall not be affected
thereby. The invalidity of any section or sections or parts of any section
or sections of this chapter shall not affect the validity of the remainder
of the Barnstable ordinances.
A.
To the extent that a conflict of interest exists between this chapter
and other ordinances of the Town of Barnstable, the more restrictive
provisions shall apply.
B.
§ 168-10 BARNSTABLE CODE § 170-2
166:214
§ 170-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BOARD OF HEALTH — The Board of Health of the Town of Barnstable.
DWELLING — Any building or area in a building used or intended for use for
human habitation, including, but not limited to, apartments, condominiums,
cottages, guesthouses, one-, two- or multiple-unit residential buildings, and
rooming houses, but not including any licensed facility.
FRONT YARD — The area between the roadway and the part of the
structure nearest to the roadway.
LICENSED FACILITY — Any facility licensed under any state or local laws
or regulations other than those registered under this chapter.
OCCUPANT — Anyone residing overnight in a dwelling.
OWNER — Any person who alone or severally with others has legal title
to any dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming unit or parcel of land, vacant
or otherwise; mortgagee in possession; or agent, trustee or other person
appointed by the courts.
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, corporation, firm, association, or
group including a governmental unit other than the Town of Barnstable or
any of its agencies.
§ 170-3. Responsibility of notification.
No person shall allow occupancy of any dwelling without first notifying the
occupant(s) at the time of such occupancy of this chapter and of Chapter
133, Noise, of the Code of the Town of Barnstable.
§ 170-4. Certificate of registration.
§ 170-5. Posting of certificate of registration.
No person shall rent or lease, or offer to rent or lease, any dwelling
or any portion of a dwelling to be used for human habitation without
first conspicuously posting within such dwelling or portion of a dwelling a
certificate of registration provided by the Board of Health specifying the
No person shall rent or lease, or offer to rent or lease, any dwelling or
any portion of a dwelling to be used for human habitation without first
registering with the Board of Health, which shall determine the number
of bedrooms and the number of persons such dwelling or portion of a
dwelling may lawfully accommodate under the provisions of any state
or local health and safety ordinance or regulation.
A.
The Board of Health shall, pursuant to the above subsection, issue
a certificate of registration which shall be renewed on the following
December 31, provided that the certificate may be renewed each year.
B.
§ 170-2 RAFFLES AND BAZAARS § 170-5
166:215
number of bedrooms and the number of persons such dwelling or portion of
a dwelling may lawfully accommodate.
§ 170-6. Keeping of register.
The owner(s) shall be responsible for keeping a register containing all
names of current occupants in the dwelling. The register shall be retained
for a period of two years and shall be made available to the Board of Health,
the Director of Public Health, a health inspector, a police officer, or the
Town's licensing agent upon request.
§ 170-7. Provision of names, addresses and telephone numbers of
owners or agent.
An owner of a dwelling which is rented for residential use shall provide
the Board of Health with his/her current residential address and telephone
number. If the owner is a corporation, the name, address, and telephone
number of the president and legal representative of the corporation shall be
provided. If the owner is a realty trust or partnership, the name, address,
and telephone number of the managing trustee or partner shall be provided.
In the event that the owner does not reside within the Commonwealth of
Massachusetts, the owner shall designate a resident agent to represent
him within the commonwealth and shall provide the Board of Health with
written notification of the name, address and telephone number of the
resident agent so designated.
§ 170-8. Fee for registration.
There shall be a fee of $90 to procure a certificate of registration. The fee
for any additional units owned by the same owner at the same address shall
be $25 per unit.21
§ 170-9. Parking restrictions.
§ 170-10. Smoke detectors and carbon monoxide alarms.
Every owner shall test and perform maintenance on every smoke detector
and carbon monoxide alarm upon renewal of any lease term for any dwelling
unit or on an annual basis, whichever is more frequent. Any detector or
alarm found to be defective shall be repaired or replaced forthwith. The
The occupant of a dwelling shall use, or allow to be used, no more than
25% of the front yard and no more than 20 feet of frontage as a parking
area and/or driveway.
A.
Nothing in this section shall be deemed to supersede the parking
requirements set forth by site plan review.
B.
21.Editor's Note: Section 3 of Order No. 2006-125 provided that, notwithstanding the
provisions of this § 170-8, the fee for the first year of registration, prior to 1-1-2007, shall
be $40 and each additional unit owned by the same owner at the same address shall be
$10 per unit.
§ 170-5 BARNSTABLE CODE § 170-10
166:216
occupant(s) must report faulty or inoperative smoke detector unit(s) to,
first, the owner of the dwelling and, second, if necessary, the local Fire
Department.
§ 170-11. Inspections. [Amended 8-1-2013 by Order No. 2013-03422]
Dwelling units covered by this chapter shall be subject to reasonable
inspections by Town inspectional staff. All interior inspections shall be done
in the company of the owner, occupant or the representative of either.
§ 170-12. Written notice of violation; time limits for correction.
§ 170-13. Violations and penalties. [Amended 8-1-2013 by Order No.
2013-034]
§ 170-14. Severability.
Each provision of this chapter shall be construed as separate. If any part
of this chapter shall be held invalid for any reason, the remainder shall
continue in full force and effect.
Chapter 173
Written notice of any violations of this chapter shall be given by the
Board of Health or its agent specifying the nature of the violation to
the occupant and owner and the time within which compliance must
be achieved. The requirements of this subsection shall be satisfied by
mailing, through the United States Postal Service, or by delivering in
hand as memorialized by an affidavit of any Town employee or officer
authorized to serve any form of process notice to the owner or legal
representative named on the registration.
A.
Violations of an unoccupied dwelling shall be corrected prior to
occupancy. Violations found in an occupied dwelling shall be corrected
within the time specified as determined by the Board of Health or the
Director of Public Health.
B.
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be subject
to a fine not to exceed $300. Any owner of a rental property found to
have two documented violations within any twelve-month period shall
pay a fine of $300. Each day of continued violation may be deemed to
be a separate offense.
A.
This chapter may be enforced under the provisions of MGL c. 40, § 21D.
The fine for any violation under the provisions of MGL c. 40, § 21D
shall be $100, or $300 for any owner of a rental property found to have
two documented violations within any twelve-month period. Each day
of continued violation may be deemed to be a separate offense.
B.
22.Editor's Note: This order also repealed former § 170-11, Storage and removal of rubbish,
garbage and other refuse, and renumbered former §§ 170-12 through 170-15 as §§ 170-11
through 170-14, respectively.
§ 170-10 ROLLER-SKATING AND SKATEBOARDING § 170-14
173:217
ROLLER-SKATING AND SKATEBOARDING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Noncriminal disposition — See Ch. 1, Art. I. Roller skates and skateboards — See Ch. 408.
§ 173-1. Roller-skating and skateboarding in congested areas
prohibited.
No person shall roller-skate or skateboard on public sidewalks in congested
areas of Town.
§ 173-2. Use of public ways prohibited.
No person shall roller-skate or skateboard in public ways in congested areas
of Town.
§ 173-3. Town Manager authorized to adopt rules and regulations.23
The Town Manager shall adopt rules and regulations to preserve and
promote the public safety, consistent with this chapter, governing the use
and rental of roller skates and/or skateboards within the Town. Such
regulations shall become effective when filed with the Town Clerk and
published in a newspaper having general circulation within the Town, and
may include, but need not be limited to, designation of the areas in which,
or the times or seasons during which, roller-skating is prohibited, and may
prohibit roller-skating and/or skateboarding on Town property in congested
areas which is not part of a public way or sidewalk.
§ 173-4. Violations and penalties.
Whoever violates the provisions of this chapter shall be punished by a fine
not to exceed $50.
§ 173-5. Severability.
The provisions of this chapter are severable. If any provisions of the chapter
or the application thereof to any person or circumstance is held
unconstitutional or invalid by any authority of competent jurisdiction, the
application of such provisions to any other person or circumstance or the
application of the remaining provisions of this chapter shall not be impaired.
23.Editor's Note: See Ch. 408, Roller Skates and Skateboards.
§ 170-14 BARNSTABLE CODE § 173-5
173:218
Chapter 177
SANDY NECK
GENERAL REFERENCES
Noncriminal disposition — See Ch. 1, Art. I.
Beaches and waterways — See Ch. 32.
Sandy Neck Barrier Beach — See Ch. 601.
§ 173-5 ROLLER-SKATING AND SKATEBOARDING § 173-5
173:219

ARTICLE I
Operation of Motor Vehicles
[Adopted 11-7-1987, approved 12-3-1987 (Art. XXVI of Ch. III of the
General Ordinances as updated through 7-7-2003); amended in its
entirety 9-2-2010 by Order No. 2011-003]
§ 177-1. Operation within closed area on Sandy Neck Beach.
No person shall operate a motor vehicle on Sandy Neck Beach except within
marked open sections of the front beach off-road vehicle corridor and on the
beach access trail.
§ 177-2. Operation on Sandy Neck Beach without valid permit.
No person shall operate a motor vehicle on Sandy Neck Beach without first
obtaining a Sandy Neck off-road vehicle permit.
§ 177-3. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating this article shall be punished by a fine of not more than
$200 for each offense.
§ 177-1 ROLLER-SKATING AND SKATEBOARDING § 177-3
173:221
Chapter 180
SCENIC ROADS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Noncriminal disposition — See Ch. 1, Art. I. — See Ch. .
§ 180-1. Definitions.
In the absence of contrary meaning established through legislative or
judicial action pursuant to M.G.L. Chapter 40, § 15C, the following terms
contained in that statute shall be defined as follows:
CUTTING OR REMOVAL OF TREES — The removal of one or more trees.
REPAIR, MAINTENANCE, RECONSTRUCTION OR PAVING WORK — Any
work done within the right-of-way by any person or agency, public or
private. Within the meaning of this definition, it is any work on any portion
of the right-of-way which was not physically commenced at the time the
road was designated as a scenic road. Construction of new driveways or
alteration of existing ones is included, insofar as it takes place within the
right-of-way.
ROAD — A right-of-way of any way used and maintained as a public way
including the vehicular traveled way plus necessary appurtenances within
the right-of-way such as bridge structures, drainage systems, retaining
walls, traffic control devices, and sidewalks, but not intersecting streets
or driveways. When the boundary of the right-of-way is an issue so that a
dispute arises as to whether or not certain trees or stonewalls or portions
thereof are within or without the way, the trees and stonewalls shall be
presumed to be within the way until the contrary is shown.
TEARING DOWN OR DESTRUCTION OF STONE WALLS — The destruction
of more than 15 linear feet of stone wall involving more than one cubic
foot of wall material per linear foot above existing grade, but shall not
be construed to include temporary removal and replacement at the same
location with the same materials.
TREES — Includes any living tree whose trunk has a diameter of four inches
or more as measured one foot above the ground.
§ 180-2. Purpose.
To protect the scenic quality and character of certain Town roads, the
following regulations are established to control alterations that can take
place within public rights-of-way.
§ 177-3 BARNSTABLE CODE § 180-3
180:222
§ 180-3. Designation of roads.
The Town may from time to time designate appropriate roads within the
Town aesthetic roads by Town Council vote.
§ 180-4. Control.
§ 180-5. Public hearing; criteria for granting approval of
applications.
The Planning Board shall hold a public hearing within 30 days of receipt
of an application, and shall approve, conditionally approve or deny an
application within 60 days of receipt. In making its decision, the Planning
Board shall consider the following criteria and shall not grant approval if
the proposed action will be in violation of one or more of them:
§ 180-6. Compensatory actions.
Since the purpose of these regulations is to protect the scenic quality and
character of designated roads, such as the planting of new trees or the
Within the public right-of-way of designated roads the Tree Warden or
his designee may approve the cutting or removal of up to three trees
per 200 linear feet of right-of-way.
A.
Within the public right-of-way of designated roads, the following
activities shall require written approval of the Planning Board in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter:
(1) The tearing down, painting or destruction of stone walls;
The cutting or removal of trees the scope of which is outside the
responsibility of the Tree Warden, as defined above;
(2)
Repair, maintenance, reconstruction or paving work, including the
construction of new driveways or alteration of existing ones,
insofar as they affect stone walls or trees within the public right-ofway,
as defined in Subsection B(1) and (2) above.
(3)
B.
In cases where a threat to public safety does not allow sufficient time
to obtain approvals from the Tree Warden or the Planning Board, the
Planning Board must be notified within five business days of any action
which, had the threat not existed, would be a violation of this chapter.
C.
A. Preservation of historic values;
B. Preservation of scenic and aesthetic quality of the area;
C. Protection of natural resource and environmental systems;
D. Public safety;
E. Compatibility with surrounding neighborhood.
§ 180-3 SCENIC ROADS § 180-6
180:223
reconstruction of stone walls in making its decision, if the overall effect of
the proposed alteration, including compensatory action, is to maintain or
improve the scenic quality and character of the road, the Board may grant
approval that otherwise would be denied.
§ 180-7. Notice.
The Planning Board shall, as required by statute, give notice of its public
hearing by advertising twice in a newspaper of general circulation in the
area. This notice shall contain a statement as to the time, date, place and
purpose of the hearing with a reasonable description of the action proposed
by the applicant. Copies of this notice shall also be sent to the Town
Manager, the Conservation Commission, the Historical Commission, the
Tree Warden, the Department of Public Works, and the owners of property
within 100 feet of the proposed action.
§ 180-8. Simultaneous review under Public Shade Tree Law.
Whenever feasible, notice shall be given and Planning Board hearings shall
be held in conjunction with those held by the Tree Warden acting under
M.G.L. Chapter 87. The consent of the Planning Board to a proposed action
shall not be regarded as inferring consent by the Tree Warden, or vice
versa. The Planning Board decision shall contain a condition that no work
should be done until all applicable provisions of the Public Shade Tree Law,
M.G.L. Chapter 87, have been compiled with.
§ 180-9. Recommendations for scenic road designation.
The Planning Board, Conservation Commission, Old Kings Highway
Regional Historic District Commission, and the Historical Commission may
submit recommendations for additions or deletions to the list of scenic
roads, which must be acted upon by the Town Council. Any recommendation
for scenic road designation must be accompanied by a written description of
the characteristics of the road that require the protection afforded by these
regulations.
§ 180-10. Adoption of regulations by Planning Board.
The Planning Board may adopt additional regulations for carrying out
provisions hereunder.
§ 180-11. Violations and penalties.
The Building Inspector, Tree Warden, or others designated by the Town
Manager may issue a citation for violation of these regulations. A failure
to respond to properly issued citations, or the issuance of three or more
citations in a twelve-month period, or failure to take responsible
compensatory action shall be construed as a major violation, subject to a
fine of not more than $100. Each day that such violation continues shall
constitute a separate offense.
§ 180-6 BARNSTABLE CODE § 180-11
180:224
Chapter 183
SENIOR CITIZEN PROPERTY TAX WORK-OFF ABATEMENT
PROGRAM
§ 183-1. Purpose.
In accordance with the provisions MGL c. 59, § 5K, the Town is offering
a program which allows certain eligible seniors aged 60 and older the
opportunity to perform work for the Town in exchange for an abatement of
property taxes for the maximum amount of $750 yearly.
§ 183-2. Eligibility.
In order to be eligible to apply for the program, an individual shall meet all
of the following requirements:
§ 183-3. Program administration.
Owns and occupies a residential property in the immediate fiscal year
preceding the fiscal year in which the taxpayer applies to volunteer his/
her services;
A.
Has reached 60 years of age by July 1 of the fiscal tax year for which
the tax credit is given;
B.
Has a gross yearly income from all sources of not more than $30,000
for single taxpayers and $40,000 for married taxpayers; and
C.
Cannot be a compensated employee of the Town during the fiscal year
for which the tax credit is sought.
D.
The Town Manager or his/her designee shall be responsible for
administering the Senior Tax Work-Off Program.
A.
The Town Manager or his/her designee shall review and approve the
volunteer services to be included in the program and place and/or
assign eligible residents to perform such services.
B.
The Town Manager or his/her designee shall certify the amount of
volunteer services performed by each participating taxpayer to the
Barnstable Board of Assessors on or before December 1 of the year
for which tax credits are to be given. Upon timely receipt of this
certification, the Board of Assessors shall credit the real property tax
obligations of the participating taxpayers in an amount not to exceed
$750 per taxpayer. A copy of each taxpayer's certification will be given
to that taxpayer. This credit shall be in addition to any exemption or
abatement for which the volunteer may otherwise be eligible.
C.
There shall be a maximum number of 20 residents who may participate
in the program in a given year.
D.
§ 180-11 SCENIC ROADS § 183-4
180:225
§ 183-4. Program criteria.
Chapter 184
SEWERS AND WATER
GENERAL REFERENCES
Noncriminal disposition — See Ch. 1, Art. I.
Hazardous materials — See Chs. 108 and 381.
Wastewater discharge — See Ch. 232.
On-site sewage disposal systems — See Ch.
360.
Wells — See Ch. 397.
Sewer connections — See Ch. 901.
The hourly rate at which the volunteer services are to be credited shall
be the minimum wage of the commonwealth in effect at the time the
services are provided.
A.
B. The Town will pay the volunteer's share of FICA taxes.
The maximum amount by which the real property tax obligation of any
one volunteer may be reduced in any given tax year shall not exceed
$750.
C.
Tax credits may be applied only toward real property, which the
volunteer occupies as a principal residence and has property tax
liability.
D.
E. Only one tax abatement per property per year shall be allowed.
Participation will be awarded using a lottery system if qualified
applications received exceed the number of available slots.
F.
Taxpayers in the program may not participate in two consecutive years
unless the number of applicants is less than the eligible slots.
G.
§ 183-4 BARNSTABLE CODE § 183-4
180:226
ARTICLE I
Sewer Use
[Adopted 5-15-1980, approved 8-26-1980; amended 11-1-1986,
approved 11-25-1986 (Art. XXXVI of Ch. III of the General
Ordinances as updated through 7-7-2003)]
§ 184-1. Definitions.
Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meaning of terms
used in this article shall be as follows:
BOD (denoting "biochemical oxygen demand") — The quantity of oxygen
utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard
laboratory procedure in five days at 20°C., expressed in milligrams per liter.
BUILDING DRAIN — That part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage
system which receives the discharge from soil, waste and other drainage
pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys in to the building sewer,
beginning five feet (1.5 meters) outside the inner face of the building wall.
BUILDING SEWER — The extension from the building drain to the public
sewer or other place of disposal.
COMBINED SEWER — A sewer receiving both surface runoff and sewage.
GARBAGE — Solid wastes from the domestic and commercial preparation,
cooking and dispensing of food, and from the handling, storage and sale of
produce.
INDUSTRIAL WASTES — The liquid waste from industrial manufacturing
processes, trade or business as distinct from sanitary sewage.
NATURAL OUTLET — Any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or
other body of surface or ground water.
PERSON — Any individual, firm, company, association, society, corporation
or group.
pH — The logarithm of the reciprocal of the weight of hydrogen ions in
grams per liter of solution.
PROPERLY SHREDDED GARBAGE — The wastes from the preparation,
cooking and dispensing of food that have been shredded to such a degree
that all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally
prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater than 1/2 inch (1.27
centimeters) in any dimension.
PUBLIC SEWER — A sewer in which all owners of abutting properties have
equal rights and is controlled by public authority.
SANITARY SEWER — A sewer which carries sewage and to which storm,
surface and ground waters and not intentionally admitted.
SEWAGE — A combination of the water-carried wastes from residences,
business buildings, institutions and industrial establishments, together with
such ground, surface and storm waters as may be present.
§ 184-1 SCENIC ROADS § 184-1
180:227
SEWAGE TREATMENT PLANT — Any arrangement of devices and
structures used for treating sewage.
SEWAGE WORKS — All facilities for collecting, pumping, treating and
disposing of sewage.
SEWER — A pipe or conduit for carrying sewage.
SHALL and MAY — "Shall" is mandatory; "may" is permissive.
SLUG — Any discharge of water, sewage, or industrial waste which in
concentration of any given constituent or in quantity of flow exceeds for any
period of duration longer than 15 minutes, more than five times the average
twenty-four-hour concentration or flows during normal operation.
STORM DRAIN (sometimes termed "storm sewer") — A sewer which carries
storm and surface waters and drainage, but excludes sewage and industrial
wastes, other than unpolluted cooling water.
SUPERINTENDENT — The Superintendent of the Department of Public
Works of the Town of Barnstable or his authorized deputy, agent or
representative.
SUSPENDED SOLIDS — Solids that either float on the surface of or are in
suspension in water, sewage or other liquids, and which are removable by
laboratory filtering.
WATERCOURSE — A channel in which a flow of water occurs, either
continuously or intermittently.
§ 184-2. Building sewers and connections.
No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connections with or
opening into, use, alter, or disturb and public sewer or appurtenance
thereof without first obtaining a written permit from the
Superintendent.
A.
Any person proposing a new discharge into the system or a substantial
change in the volume or character of pollutants that are being
discharged into the system shall notify the Superintendent at least 45
days prior to the proposed change or connection.
B.
A sewer connection permit shall be required before any building or
unit thereof is connected to the Town sewer system. The owner or his/
her agent shall make application on a special form furnished by the
Town. The permit shall be supplemented by any plans, specifications,
or other information considered pertinent in the judgment of the
Superintendent. A permit and inspection fee shall be paid to the Town
at the time the application is filed. The fee shall be based on the
classification of the building or unit thereof to be connected as specified
in the sewer connection fee schedule in effect at the time the
application is filed. [Amended 11-5-1988; approved 1-3-1989]
C.
All costs and expenses incident to the installation and connection of the
building sewer shall be borne by the owner. The owner shall indemnify
D.
§ 184-1 BARNSTABLE CODE § 184-2
180:228
the Town from any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be
occasioned by the installation of the building sewer.
A separate and independent billing sewer shall be provided for every
building; except where one building stands at the rear of another on
an interior lot and no private sewer is available or can be constructed
to the rear building through an adjoining alley, court, yard or driveway,
the building sewer from the front building may be extended to the rear
building and the whole considered as one building sewer.
E.
Old buildings sewers may be used in connection with new buildings
only when they are found, on examination and test by the
Superintendent, to meet all requirements of this article.
F.
The size, slope, alignment, materials of construction of a building sewer
and the methods to be used in excavating, placing of the pipe, jointing,
testing, and backfilling the trench shall all conform to the requirements
of the Building and Plumbing Code or other applicable rules and
regulations of the Town. In the absence of code provisions or in
amplification thereof, the materials and procedures set forth in
appropriate specifications of the ASTM and WPCF Manual of Practice
No. 9 shall apply.
G.
Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the building
at an elevation below the basement floor. In all buildings in which any
building drain is too low to permit gravity to flow to the public sewer,
sanitary sewage carried by such buildings drain shall be lifted by an
approved means and discharged to the building sewer.
H.
No person shall make connection of roof downspouts, exterior
foundation drains, areaway drains, or other sources of surface runoff or
groundwater to a building or sewer or building drain which in turn is
connected directly or indirectly to a public sanitary sewer.
I.
The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall
conform to the requirements of the Building and Plumbing Code or
other applicable rules and regulations of the Town, or the procedures
set forth in an appropriate specifications of the ASTM and the WPCF
Manual of Practice No. 9. All such connections shall be made gas-tight
and water-tight. Any deviation from the prescribed procedures and
materials must be approved by the Superintendent before installation.
J.
The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the
Superintendent when the building sewer is ready for inspection and
connection to the public sewer. The connection shall be made under the
supervision of the Superintendent or his representative.
K.
All excavations for building sewer installation shall be adequately
guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from
hazard. Street, sidewalks, parkways and other public property
disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored in a manner
satisfactory to the Town.
L.
§ 184-2 SCENIC ROADS § 184-3
180:229
§ 184-3. Use of public sewers.
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any stormwater,
surface water, or unpolluted industrial process waters to any sanitary
sewer.
A.
Stormwater and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to
such sewers as are specifically designed as combined sewers or storm
sewers, or to a natural outlet approved by the Superintendent.
Industrial cooling water or unpolluted waters may be discharged, on
approval of the Superintendent to a storm sewer, combined sewer or
natural outlet.
B.
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the
following described waters or wastes to any public sewers:
Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil or other flammable liquid,
solid or gas.
(1)
Any waters or wastes containing toxic or poisonous solids, liquids,
or gases in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with
other wastes, to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment
process, constitute a hazard to animals or humans, create a public
nuisance or create any hazard in the receiving waters of the
sewage treatment plant.
(2)
Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 5.5 or having any
other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to
structures, equipment and personnel of the sewage works.
(3)
Solid or viscous substances in quantities or of such size capable
of accusing obstruction to the flow in sewers or other interference
with the proper operation of the sewage works such as, but not
limited to, ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass,
rags, feathers, tar, plastics, wood, unground garbage, whole blood,
paunch manure, hair and fleshings, entrails and paper fishes, cups,
milk containers, etc., either whole or ground by garbage grinders.
(4)
C.
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged, the following
described substances, materials, waters, or wastes if it appears likely in
the opinion of the Superintendent that such wastes can harm either the
sewers, sewage treatment process, or equipment, having an adverse
effect on the receiving stream, or can otherwise endanger life, limb,
public property or constitute a nuisance. In forming his opinion as
to the acceptability of these wastes, the Superintendent will give
consideration to such factors as the quantities of subject wastes in
relation to flows and velocities in the sewers, materials of construction
of the sewers, nature of the sewage treatment process, capacity of the
sewage treatment plant, degree of treatability of wastes in the sewage
treatment plant and other pertinent factors. The substances prohibited
are:
D.
§ 184-3 BARNSTABLE CODE § 184-3
180:230
Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than 150° F. or
65° C.
(1)
Any water or waste containing fats, wax, grease, or oils whether
emulsified or not, in excess of 100 mg/1 or containing substances
which may solidify or become viscous at temperatures between 32°
F. and 150° F. and 0° C. and 65° C.
(2)
Any garbage that has not been properly shredded. The installation
and operation of any garbage grinder equipped with a motor of 3/
4 horsepower (0.76 hp metric) or greater shall be subject to the
review and approval of the Superintendent.
(3)
Any waters or wastes containing strong acid iron picking wastes,
or concentrated plating solutions whether neutralized or not.
(4)
Any waters or wastes containing iron, chromium, copper, zinc,
and similar objectionable or toxic substances; or wastes exerting
an excessive chlorine requirement, to such degree that any such
material received in the composite sewage at the sewage treatment
works exceeds the limits established by the Superintendent for
such materials.
(5)
Any waters or wastes containing phenols or other taste- or odorproducing
substances, in such concentrations exceeding limits
which may be established by the Superintendent as necessary, after
treatment of the composite sewage to meet the requirements of
the state, federal, or other public agencies or jurisdiction for such
discharge to the receiving waters.
(6)
Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or concentration
as may exceed limits established by the superintendent in
compliance with applicable state or federal regulations.
(7)
(8) Any waters or wastes having a pH in excess of 9.5.
Materials which exert or cause:
Unusual concentrations of inert suspended solids (such as, but
not limited to, fuller's earth, lime slurries, and lime residues)
or of solids (such as, but not limited to, sodium chloride and
sodium sulfate).
(a)
Excessive discoloration (such as, but not limited to, dye wastes
and vegetable tanning solution).
(b)
Unusual volume of flow or concentration of wastes constituting
slugs as defined herein.
(c)
Unusual BOD, chemical oxygen demand, or chlorine
requirements in such quantities as to constitute a significant
load on the sewage treatment works.
(d)
(9)
§ 184-3 SCENIC ROADS § 184-3
180:231
Waters or wastes containing substances which are not amenable
to treatment or reduction by the sewage treatment processes
employed, or are amenable to treatment only to such degree that
the sewage treatment plant effluent cannot meet the requirements
of other agencies having jurisdiction over discharge to the
receiving waters.
(10)
If any waters or wastes are discharged, or are proposed to be
discharged to the public sewers, which waters contain the substances
or possess the characteristics enumerated in § 184-3D of this chapter,
and which, in the judgment of the Superintendent, may have a
deleterious effect upon the sewage works, processes, equipment or
receiving waters, or which otherwise create a hazard to life or
constitute a public nuisance, the Superintendent may:
(1) Reject the wastes;
Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to
the public sewers;
(2)
(3) Require control over the quantities and rate of discharge; and/or
Require payment to cover the added cost of handling and treating
the wastes not covered by existing taxes or by sewer charges.
(4)
E.
If the Superintendent permits the pretreatment or equalization of waste
flows, the design and installation of the plants and equipment shall be
subject to the review and approval of the Superintendent and subject to
the requirements of all applicable codes, ordinances, and laws.
F.
Grease, oil, and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the
opinion of the Superintendent, they are necessary for the proper
handling of liquid wastes containing grease in excessive amounts, or
any flammable wastes, sand, or other harmful ingredients, except that
such interceptors shall not be required for private living quarters or
dwelling units. All interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved
by the Superintendent, and shall be located as to be ready and easily
accessible for cleaning and inspection.
G.
Where preliminary treatment or flow-equalizing facilities are provided
for any water or wastes, they shall be maintained continuously in
satisfactory and effective operation by the owner at his expense.
H.
When required by the Superintendent, the owner of any property
serviced by a building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install
a suitable control manhole together with such necessary meters and
other appurtenances in the building sewer to facilitate observation,
sampling and measurement of the wastes. Such manhole, when
required, shall be accessible and safely located, and shall be
constructed in accordance with plans approved by the Superintendent.
The manhole shall by installed by the owner at his expense and shall be
maintained by him so as to be safe and accessible at all times.
I.
§ 184-3 BARNSTABLE CODE § 184-3
180:232
§ 184-4. Protection from damage.
§ 184-5. Powers and authority of inspectors.
All measurements, tests and analyses of the characteristics of waters
and wastes to which reference is made in this article shall be
determined in accordance with the latest edition of "Standard Methods
for the examination of Water and Wastewater," published by the
American Public Health Association, and shall be determined at the
control manhole. In the event that no special manhole has been
required, the control manholes shall be considered to be the nearest
downstream manhole in the public sewer to the point at which the
building sewer is connected. Sampling shall be carried out by
customarily accepted methods to reflect the effect of constitutes upon
the sewage works and to determine the existence of hazards to life,
limb, and property. The particular analyses involved will determine
whether a twenty-four-hour composite of all outfalls of a premises is
appropriate or whether a grab sample or samples should be taken.
Normally, but not always, BOD and suspended solids analyses are
obtained from twenty-four-hour composites of all outfalls where pH's
are determined from periodic grab samples.
J.
All industry discharging into a public sewer shall perform such
monitoring of their discharges the Superintendent and/or other duly
authorized employees of the Town may reasonably require, including
installation, use and maintenance of monitoring equipment, keeping
records and reporting the results of such monitoring to the
Superintendent. Agencies having jurisdiction over discharges to the
receiving waters.
K.
No person shall:
Maliciously, willfully, or negligently break, damage, destroy,
uncover, deface, or tamper with any structure, appurtenance or
equipment which is a part of the public sewer system.
(1)
Unless specifically authorized by the Superintendent, discharge
any liquid or soils of any description whatsoever through any
opening or connection to or leading into the public sewer system
other than an authorized plumbing fixture.
(2)
A.
Any person violating this provision shall be fined not more than $300
per incident. Each day or part of a day in which an incident occurs shall
be treated as a separate offense.
B.
The Superintendent and other duly authorized employees of the Town
bearing proper credential and identification shall be permitted to enter
all properties for the purpose of inspection, observation, measurement,
sampling, and testing in accordance with the provisions of this article.
The Superintendent or his representatives shall have no authority to
inquire into any processes including metallurgical, chemical, oil,
A.
§ 184-3 SCENIC ROADS § 184-5
180:233
§ 184-6. Private pumping stations. [Added 11-5-1988, approved
1-3-1989]
refining, ceramic, paper or other industries beyond that point having a
direct bearing on the kind and source of discharging to the sewers or
waterways of facilities for waste treatment.
While performing the necessary work on private properties referred
to in Subsection A, the Superintendent or duly authorized employees
of the Town shall observe all safety rules applicable to the premises
established by the company, and the company shall be held harmless for
injury or death to the Town employees, and the Town shall indemnify
the company against loss or damage to its property by Town employees
and against liability claims and demands for personal property or injury
damage asserted against the company and growing out of the gauging
and sampling operations except as such may be caused by negligence
or failure of the company to maintain safe conditions as required in
§ 184-3.
B.
The Superintendent and other duly authorized employees of the Town
bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to
enter all private properties through which the Town holds a duly
negotiated easement for the purposes of, but not limited to, inspection,
observation, measurement, sampling, repair and maintenance of any
portion of the sewage works lying within said easement. All entry
and subsequent work, if any, on said easement, shall be done in full
accordance with the terms of the duly negotiated easement pertaining
to the private property involved.
C.
Privately owned sewage pumping stations which discharge into the
public sewer shall be designed and constructed in accordance with
the same engineering standards used for construction of Town-owned
pumping stations. Plans and specifications or other information
considered pertinent shall be submitted to the Superintendent for
review and approval prior to commencing construction.
A.
Stations in this category shall not be placed into operation until an
inspection of the facility of conducted and the facility is deemed
satisfactory to the Superintendent.
B.
To insure satisfactory operational performances, owners of such
facilities shall perform the following minimum maintenance annually:
(1) Clean wet wells.
(2) Test high-water alarms.
(3) Power transfer test generator (if part of the approved installation).
(4) Routine preventive maintenance.
C.
§ 184-5 BARNSTABLE CODE § 184-6
180:234
§ 184-7. Violations and penalties.
§ 184-8. Repealer; severability.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith are hereby
repealed. The invalidity of any section, clause, sentence or provision of this
article shall not affect any other part of this article which can be given effect
without such invalid part or parts.
§ 184-9. When effective.
This article shall be in full force and effect from and after its passage,
approval, recording and publication as provided by law.
Documentation certifying completion of the above maintenance items
shall be submitted December 31 of each year to the Superintendent.
In the case of preventive maintenance, a chart shall be submitted
documenting maintenance checks performed and dates on which
performed throughout the year on all installed equipment. The chart
shall also indicate types of repairs and the dates on which they were
made.
D.
Upon petition of the owner, the Town may assume ownership and
responsibility for the operation and maintenance of the station,
provided that the facility meets current standards of design and
construction and material condition; necessary property easements are
conveyed to the Town; and the Superintendent deems it to be in the
best interests of the Town.
E.
Any person found to be violating any provision of this article, except
§ 184-4, shall be served by the Town with written notice stating the
nature of the violation and providing a reasonable time limit for the
satisfactory correction thereof. The offender shall, within a period of
time stated in such notice, permanently cease all violations.
A.
Any person who shall continue any violation beyond the time limit
provided for in Subsection A shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and on
conviction thereof, shall be fined in the amount not exceeding $200 for
each violation. Each day in which any violation shall continue shall be
deemed a separate offense.
B.
§ 184-6 SCENIC ROADS § 184-9
180:235

ARTICLE II
Collection of Sewer Use Charges
[Adopted 10-3-1991 (Art. XVIII of Ch. II of the General Ordinances
as updated through 7-7-2003)]
§ 184-10. Adoption of statutory provisions.
The provisions of §§ 16A through 16F of Chapter 83 of the General Laws,
with respect to the collection of sewer use charges, are hereby adopted by
reference as a part of the general ordinances of the Town.
§ 184-11. Authority to follow statutory collection methods.
The Town Manager, together with the other officials of the Town therein
named, are hereby authorized to follow the methods set forth therein in the
collection of such charges.
§ 184-12. Proportionate share of sewer betterment costs
assessment charges. [Added 7-15-2010 by Order No. 2010-15824]
Fifty percent of the costs or charges for sewer construction shall be
assessed to parcels or owners of land in the manner provided in Chapter 80
or 83 of the General Laws as applicable. This section shall not apply to costs
or charges for sewer connection or use.
24.Editor's Note: This order also renumbered former §§ 184-12 and 184-13 as §§ 184-13 and
184-14, respectively.
§ 184-10 SCENIC ROADS § 184-12
180:237

ARTICLE III
Collection of Water Use Charges
[Adopted 3-19-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-070]
§ 184-13. Adoption of statutory provisions.
The provisions of §§ 42A through 42F, inclusive, of Chapter 40 of the
General Laws, with respect to the collection of water use charges by the
Water Supply Division of the Department of Public Works, are hereby
adopted by reference as a part of the general ordinances of the Town.
§ 184-14. Authority to follow statutory collection methods.
The Town Manager, together with the other officials of the Town therein
named, are hereby authorized to follow the methods set forth therein in the
collection of such charges.
§ 184-13 SCENIC ROADS § 184-14
180:239
Chapter 188
SHELLFISHERIES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Shellfish — See Ch. 407.
§ 188-1. Authority of Town Manager to adopt rules and regulations.
Pursuant to Section 6 of Article 89 of the amendments to the Constitution
of the Commonwealth, the Charter of the Town and Chapter 130 of the
General Laws, a local system to control, regulate or prohibit the taking
of eels and any or all kinds of shellfish, sea worms, and alewives within
the Town is authorized. In accordance with Chapter 130 of the General
Laws the Town Manager, subject to disapproval by the Town Council, shall
annually adopt rules and regulations not contrary to law in regard to
the shellfisheries. The Shellfish Constable, together with the Shellfish
Committee shall be responsible for advising the Town Manager in regard to
the drafting of said rules and regulations. The Town Manager shall subject
said rules and regulations to a public hearing before final adoption.
§ 188-2. Shellfish aquaculture licenses.
The Town Manager shall also be responsible for the granting of shellfish
aquaculture licenses, subject to disapproval by the Town Council. Upon
written application accompanied by sufficient plans to show the intended
project and project area to be licensed, the Town Manager shall forward
said application to the appropriate boards, committees and departments
and shall serve notice of a public hearing to be held pursuant to § 60,
Chapter 130, MGL.
§ 188-3. Transmission of rules to Council; posting.
The Town Manager shall promulgate rules and regulations and make grants
as aforesaid, and publish the same and file the same with the Town Clerk,
and shall, forthwith upon their promulgation transmit them to the Town
Council. They shall become effective upon the expiration of 30 days unless
the Council votes within said time to disapprove them. Regulations made
hereunder shall be published by posting a copy of the same in the office
of the Town Manager, and in the office of the Town Clerk, and in three or
more public places in said city or Town, or by publishing the same once in a
newspaper, if any, published in the Town, and as may be further prescribed
by law.
§ 188-4. Town Manager undertakings not requiring Council
approval.
§ 184-14 BARNSTABLE CODE § 188-4
188:240
§ 188-5. Emergency action.
The Town Manager without a hearing may take any emergency action
necessary for immediate management or control of the shellfisheries. Such
emergency action shall not remain in effect for a period longer than 60 days,
unless approved by the Town Council.
Chapter 192
SIGNS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Noncriminal disposition — See Ch. 1, Art. I. Sign regulations — See Ch. 240, Art. VII.
The Town Manager may undertake the following without approval by
the Town Council:
(1) Granting commercial and family permits.
Opening and closing area shellfisheries with the advice of the
Shellfish Constable.
(2)
(3) Enforcement of rules and regulations
Promote propagation efforts for the enhancement of the Town of
Barnstable fisheries with advice of the Shellfish Committee.
(4)
A.
The Town Manager shall have the authority to take emergency action
as defined below.
B.
§ 188-4 SIGNS § 188-5
192:241

ARTICLE I
Billboards and Advertising Devices
[Adopted 3-4-1924, approved 4-1-1924 (Art. II of Ch. III of the
General Ordinances as updated through 7-7-2003)]
§ 192-1. Prohibited signs.
No person, firm, association or corporation shall erect, display or maintain a
billboard sign, or other outdoor advertising device, except those exempted
by §§ 30 and 32 of Chapter 93 of the General Laws.
§ 192-2. Blocks in which majority of buildings are residential in
nature.
No billboard, sign or other advertising device shall be erected, displayed
or maintained in any block in which 1/2 of the buildings on both sides of
the street are used exclusively for residential purposes, except that this
provision shall not apply if the written consent of the owners of a majority
of the frontage on both sides of the street in such block is first obtained and
is filed with the Division of Highways of the Department of Public Works,
together with the application for a permit for such billboard, sign or other
advertising device.
A. Within 50 feet of any public way.
Within 300 feet of any public park, playground or other public grounds,
if within view of any portion of the same.
B.
Nearer than 50 feet to any other such billboard, sign or other
advertising device, unless said billboards, signs or other advertising
devices are placed back to back.
C.
On any location at the corner of any public ways and within a radius of
150 feet from the point where the center lines of such ways intersect.
D.
Nearer than 100 feet to any public way, if within view of any portion
of the same, if such billboard, sign or other advertising shall exceed a
length of eight feet or a height of four feet.
E.
Nearer than 300 feet to any public way, if within view of any portion of
the same, if such billboard, sign or other advertising device shall exceed
a length of 25 feet or a height of 12 feet.
F.
In any event if such billboard, sign or other advertising device shall
exceed a length of 50 feet or a height of 12 feet, except the Town
Manager may permit the erection of billboards, signs or other
advertising devices which do not exceed 40 feet in length and 15 feet
in height if not nearer than 300 feet to the boundary line of any public
way.
G.
§ 192-1 SIGNS § 192-3
192:243
§ 192-3. Permit required.
No billboard, sign or other advertising device shall be erected, displayed
or maintained until a permit therefor has been issued by the Division of
Highways of the Department of Public Works pursuant to the following
provisions: Upon receipt from said Division of a notice that application for
permit to erect, display or maintain a billboard, sign or other advertising
device within the limits of the Town has been received by it, the Town
Manager shall hold a public hearing on said application in said Town,
notice of which shall be given by posting the same in three or more public
places in said Town at least one week before the date of such hearing.
A written statement as to the results thereof shall be forwarded to the
Division, containing, in the event of a disapproval of such application, the
reasons thereof, within 30 days from the date of notice of the Town that an
application for such a permit has been made.
§ 192-4. Nonapplicability.
§ 192-5. Violations and penalties.
Whoever violates any of the provisions of this article shall be punished by a
fine of not more than $100, and whoever, after conviction for such violation,
unlawfully maintains such billboard, sign or other outdoor advertising
device for 20 days thereafter shall be punished by a fine of not more than
$500.
§ 192-6. Severability.
If any provision of this article is declared unconstitutional or illegal by
final judgment, order or decree of the Supreme Judicial Court of the
commonwealth, the validity of the remaining provisions of this article shall
not be affected hereby.
The provisions of § 192-1A, C, D, E, F and G shall not apply to districts
which the Town Manager may determine are of a business character.
A.
This article shall not apply to signs or other devices which advertise
or indicate either the person occupying the premises in question or
the business transacted thereon, or advertise the property itself or any
part thereof as for sale or to let, and provided further that this article
shall not apply to billboards, signs or other advertising devices legally
maintained, at the time of its approval by the Attorney General, until
one year from the first day of July following such approval.
B.
§ 192-3 BARNSTABLE CODE § 192-6
192:244
ARTICLE II
Signs with Moving, Flashing or Animated Parts
[Adopted 11-1-1980, approved 2-27-1981 (Art. XXXVII of Ch. III of
the General Ordinances as updated through 7-7-2003)]
§ 192-7. Signs with moving, flashing or animated parts prohibited.
No person shall maintain or operate any sign or other such device or
structure visible from any way within the Town which is open to the public,
and which makes use of any moving, flashing or animated lights, or visible
moving or movable parts. Such signs or flashing devices, or portions
thereof, which flash, rotate or otherwise change at intervals not more
frequent than one hour and portions of signs which consists solely of
indicators of time or temperature shall not be deemed to make use of
moving, flashing or animated lights or visible moving or movable parts.
§ 192-8. Enforcement.
This article may be enforced by any police officer of the Town or by the Sign
Control Officer under Chapter 240, Zoning.
§ 192-9. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating the provisions of this article shall be punished by a fine
of not more than $200 for each offense. Each day that a violation hereof
exists shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 192-7 SIGNS § 192-9
192:245
Chapter 195
SINGLE-USE PLASTIC CARRY-OUT BAGS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Handbills — See Ch. 100.
Hazardous materials — See Ch. 108.
Solid waste — See Ch. 202.
§ 195-1. Purpose and intent.
The production and use of single-use plastic checkout bags have significant
impacts on the marine and land environment of all coastal communities,
including but not limited to: contributing to the potential death of marine
and terrestrial animals through ingestion and entanglement; contributing to
pollution of the land and coastal environment; clogging our storm drainage
systems; creating a burden on our solid waste collection and recycling
efforts; and requiring the use of millions of barrels of nonrenewable,
polluting fossil fuel nationally for their manufacture. Therefore, the purpose
of this chapter is to phase out the use of single-use plastic checkout bags by
all establishments as defined herein in the Town of Barnstable over a period
of 12 months from the effective date of this chapter.
§ 195-2. Definitions.
For purposes of this chapter, the following words shall have the following
meanings.
CARRY-OUT BAG — Any bag that is provided at the point of sale to a
customer of an establishment for use to transport or carry away purchases,
such as merchandise, goods or food, except as otherwise exempted under
§ 195-4.
CUSTOMER — Any person purchasing goods, articles, food or personal
services from an establishment.
ENFORCING PERSON — Those persons listed in § 1-2A, for noncriminal
enforcement of ordinances, rules and regulations, of the General
Ordinances of the Code of the Town of Barnstable, as further delegated by
the time of taking effect pursuant to § 195-6.
ESTABLISHMENT — Any business selling goods, articles, food or personal
services to the public, including public eating establishments and take-out
restaurants.
OPERATOR — The person in control of, or having the responsibility for, the
operation of an establishment, which may include, but is not limited to, the
owner.
PERSON — Any natural person, firm, corporation, partnership, or other
organization or group however organized.
§ 192-9 BARNSTABLE CODE § 195-2
192:246
PLASTIC BAG — Any bag made of plastic derived from either petroleum,
ethylene derived from natural gas, polyethylene, polyethylene
terephthalate, polyvinyl chloride, polypropylene, or nylon.
PRODUCT BAG — A bag integrated into the packaging of the product.
REUSABLE BAG — A bag specifically designed and manufactured for longterm
multiple reuses made of cloth, fabric or other durable, washable
materials.
SINGLE-USE PLASTIC BAG — A plastic carryout bag with integral handles
and thickness less than 3.0 mils.
§ 195-3. Use regulated.
Single-use plastic carryout bags shall not be sold, provided, or distributed
to a customer or any other person by any person, owner, or operator of any
establishment within the Town of Barnstable.
§ 195-4. Exemptions and alternatives.
The following are exempt and not subject to the provisions of this
chapter:
Bags used by customers inside establishments to:
Package bulk items, such as fruit, vegetables, nuts, grains,
candy or small hardware items;
(a)
Contain or wrap frozen foods, meat, or fish, whether packaged
or not;
(b)
Contain or wrap flowers, potted plants, or other items where
dampness may be a problem.
(c)
(1)
Laundry or dry-cleaning bags or bags sold in packages containing
multiple bags intended to be used for home food storage, garbage,
waste, pet waste or yard waste.
(2)
(3) Product bags.
A.
Nothing in this chapter prohibits customers from using bags of any
type that they bring to the grocery store, food provider, or other
establishment themselves or from carrying away goods that are not
placed in a bag. Customers are encouraged to bring their own reusable
bags to the aforesaid establishments.
B.
Establishments may and are strongly encouraged to distribute paper
bags, reusable bags and boxes available to customers with or without
charge and educate their staff to promote reusable bags and post signs
encouraging customers to use washable reusable bags.
C.
The Town Manager or designee may prior to the effective date of this
chapter engage in any outreach process to establishments concerning
D.
§ 195-2 SIGNS § 195-4
192:247
§ 195-5. Provision of reusable bag at no cost.
Notwithstanding the provisions of § 195-4, an establishment shall provide a
reusable bag at no cost upon the request of a customer who uses a voucher
issued under the Special Supplemental Food Program for Women, Infant
and Children (WIC) pursuant to MGL c. 111.
§ 195-6. When effective.
In addition to the exemption provided in § 195-4D, in order to further assist
existing establishments in complying with this chapter by phasing out the
use of single-use plastic carry-out bags over a period of 12 months from the
effective date this chapter, this chapter shall take effect after 12 months
from the expiration of 30 days from the date of its adoption.
§ 195-7. Inspection and enforcement.
Any enforcing person shall have the right to enter any establishment during
regular business hours, without a search or inspection warrant, to make
reasonable inspection to ascertain whether there is compliance with the
provisions of this chapter. Upon finding a violation of this chapter, an
enforcing person shall issue a written warning notice to the operator of the
establishment that a violation has occurred and the potential penalties that
will apply for future violations.
§ 195-8. Violations and penalties.
Any establishment that violates or fails to comply with this chapter shall
be subject to the following penalties to be enforced in law or equity by
any means, including without limitation noncriminal disposition pursuant
to MGL c. 40 § 21D, provided that no more than one penalty after written
warning shall be imposed upon an establishment within a seven-day
calendar day period:
§ 195-9. Severability.
If any provision of this chapter shall be held to be invalid by a court of
competent jurisdiction, then such provision shall be considered separately
this chapter and exempt an establishment from the requirements of
§ 195-3 for a period of not more than one year upon the establishment's
showing, in writing, that this chapter would create an undue hardship
or practical difficulty not generally applicable to other persons in
similar circumstances. The decision to grant or deny an exemption shall
be in writing and the Town Manager's decision shall be final.
A. First offense: written warning.
B. Second offense: fine of $100.
Third and subsequent offenses: $200 and the Town may in its discretion
publish the fine on its website after the third and subsequent offense.
C.
§ 195-4 BARNSTABLE CODE § 195-9
192:248
and apart from the remaining provisions of this chapter, which shall remain
in full force and effect.
Chapter 198
SOIL, SAND AND GRAVEL PITS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Noncriminal disposition — See Ch. . — See Ch. .
§ 198-1. Permit required for removal of topsoil, subsoil, gravel or
sand.
No topsoil, subsoil, gravel, sand or other earth may be removed from
the Town of Barnstable without first having obtained a permit from the
Town Manager. A permit, with conditions imposed where necessary, may
be issued for the removal of topsoil, subsoil, gravel, sand, and other earth
if the Town Manager, after a public hearing, shall so order, provided that
no such permit shall be granted except upon written application and after
a public hearing of parties interested and consideration of their evidence
by the Town Manager; notice of said hearing being given by publication of
the time and place thereof in a local newspaper not less than two weeks
before said hearing, the expense of publication to be borne by the petitioner.
After such a hearing the Town Manager shall render a decision in writing
stating the decision and the reasons therefor and file the decision with the
Town Clerk and send a copy thereof to the applicant. Such permit may be
renewed.
§ 198-2. Replanting or reforestation required.
No topsoil or subsoil shall be removed from place to place within the Town
of Barnstable from an area of ground consisting of more than 5,000 square
feet unless the person removing such topsoil or subsoil shall replant the
entire area of such removal with rye, vetch, wheat, legumes or other soilimproving
plants, or plant with a permanent cover crop or reforest the area.
§ 198-3. Permit required for sand and gravel pits. [Amended
3-6-1965, approved 3-25-1965]
No sand or gravel shall be removed from place to place within the Town of
Barnstable, except that a sand and gravel pit may be open and used for such
purpose if it is located 100 feet or more from a street line and no more than
one entry and one exit, provided a permit is first obtained from the Town
Manager, after a public hearing has been held as set forth in § 198-1. The
owner or owners of all sand and gravel pits shall burn or cart to the Town
dumping area all dead trees and shrubs when any area amounting to more
§ 195-9 SOIL, SAND AND GRAVEL PITS § 198-3
198:249
than 5,000 square feet becomes unsuited for further use, and in such cases
the area shall be replanted with trees or shrubs to prevent soil erosion.
§ 198-4. Nonapplicability.
The foregoing shall not apply to land in public use nor shall they apply to
the case of materials removed or excavated for the purpose of improving,
grading, landscaping, cultivating the ground, nor for construction of
buildings and the making of public or private improvements.
§ 198-5. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating the provisions of this chapter shall be punished by a
fine not to exceed $50 for the first offense, $100 for the second offense and
$200 for each subsequent offense.
Chapter 202
SOLID WASTE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Storage of garbage and refuse — See Ch. 353,
Art. I.
Solid waste management — See Ch. 373.
§ 198-3 BARNSTABLE CODE § 198-5
202:250
ARTICLE I
Collection and Disposal of Waste
[Adopted 2-21-1991 by Order No. 91-63 (Art. LII of Ch. III of the
General Ordinances as updated through 7-7-2003)]
§ 202-1. Waste collection permits required.
No person shall, for compensation, collect or transport garbage or refuse
generated within the Town of Barnstable, whether from residential,
commercial or industrial sources, without a waste collection permit from
the Barnstable Board of Health. Such permits shall specify that the waste
collected must be disposed of at either the Barnstable Sanitary Landfill in
Marstons Mills or at the Town of Yarmouth Solid Waste Transfer Station, as
may be determined by the Barnstable Department of Public Works.
§ 202-2. Signed manifest required.
At the designated point of disposal, each delivery vehicle shall submit a
signed manifest on a form approved by the Board of Health, identifying
the point(s) of collection or collection routes (on file with the Barnstable
Department of Public Works), the date on which the waste was collected,
the driver of the vehicle, and the waste collection permittee. No loads
of waste shall be accepted at the Barnstable Sanitary Landfill or at the
Yarmouth Solid Waste Transfer Station without a properly completed
manifest.
§ 202-3. Special permits for recycling.
Notwithstanding the provisions of §§ 202-1 and 202-2 above, the Board of
Health may grant special permits for the collection of recyclable materials
generated within the Town of Barnstable if it finds that there is a valid
agreement between a generator of commercial or industrial recyclable
waste and a waste disposal or recycling firm expressly providing for the
recycling of the material so collected. Material collected under such special
recycling permits may be transported to and disposed of at locations other
than the Barnstable Sanitary Landfill and the Yarmouth Solid Waste
Transfer Station. The same manifesting requirements shall apply to
recycling permittees as to waste collection permittees, except that
manifests for recycled materials delivered to a disposal site other than the
Barnstable Sanitary Landfill or the Yarmouth Solid Waste Transfer Station
shall, in addition, identify the delivery site and the date of delivery. Such
manifests shall be submitted to the Barnstable Department of Public Works
by the permittee within 15 days of delivery.
§ 202-4. Applicability of other laws and regulations.
Permit holders must comply with all other applicable laws, ordinances and
regulations including in the case of deliveries to the Yarmouth Solid Waste
Transfer Station, the regulations of the Yarmouth Board of Health and the
Yarmouth Solid Waste Transfer Station Board of Control.
§ 202-1 SOLID WASTE § 202-5
202:251
§ 202-5. Violations and penalties.
Violation of this article is punishable by loss of permit and/or a fine of not
more than $300 per violation.
§ 202-5 BARNSTABLE CODE § 202-5
202:252
ARTICLE II
Recycling
[Adopted 9-20-2001 by Order No. 2002-007 (Art. XXI of Ch. II of the
General Ordinances as updated through 7-7-2003)]
§ 202-6. Refuse haulers required to provide recycling service.
The Board of Health shall, as a condition of every license granted to haulers
of rubbish and offal under MGL C. 111, § 31A, require that the licensee
provide a service at reasonable cost, optional to customers, of recycling
waste. The Board shall make rules and regulations to give effect to this
article under the authority hereof as well as under the provisions of MGL C.
111, § 31B.
§ 202-7. Facility for handling recylables.
The Town Manager is directed to immediately work with the haulers, the
county and other towns to help provide a facility for the handling of
recyclables to be collected.
§ 202-6 SOLID WASTE § 202-7
202:253
Chapter 206
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Noncriminal disposition — See Ch. 1, Art. I.
Newsracks on streets — See Ch. 130.
Outdoor businesses — See Ch. 141.
Roller-skating and skateboarding — See Chs.
173 and 408.
Scenic roads — See Ch. 180.
Junk dealers — See Ch. 502.
§ 202-7 BARNSTABLE CODE § 202-7
202:254
ARTICLE I
Junk, Animals and Water on Streets
[Adopted 3-3-1914, approved 10-28-1915 (Art. I of Ch. III of the
General Ordinances as updated through 7-7-2003)]
§ 206-1. Placing trash, rubbish or noxious liquids on streets
prohibited. [Amended 5-18-1976, approved 9-13-1976]
No person shall throw away or sweep into, or place, or drop, or suffer to
remain in any street, any hoops, boards, or other wood with nails projecting
therefrom or nails of any kind, shavings, ashes, hair, manure, rubbish, offal
or filth of any kind, or any noxious or refuse liquid or solid substance.
§ 206-2. Pasturing of animals.
No person shall pasture any cattle, goats, or other animal, either with or
without keeper upon any street or way in the Town, provided that nothing
herein contained shall affect the right of a person to use of the land within
the limits of a street or way adjoining his own premises.
§ 206-3. Impure waters.
No person shall allow any sink water or other impure liquid to run from the
house, barn or lot, occupied by him into any street of the Town.
§ 206-4. License for junk collection required.
No person shall barter, or trade, and collect junk without a license from the
Town Manager of the Town.
§ 206-1 SOLID WASTE § 206-4
202:255

ARTICLE II
Snow and Ice Removal
[Adopted 3-6-1965, approved 3-25-1965 (Art. XII of Ch. III of the
General Ordinances as updated through 7-7-2003)]
§ 206-5. Snow and ice on street restricted. [Amended 11-6-1978,
approved 2-6-1979]
No person shall throw or put snow or ice into a street or on a sidewalk
unless especially authorized by the Superintendent of Public Works or his
designee.
§ 206-6. Removal of vehicles interfering with removal operations;
storage charges. [Amended 11-6-1978, approved 2-6-1979]
The Superintendent of Public Works or his designees is hereby authorized
to remove, or cause to be removed, to some convenient place, including
in such term a public garage, any vehicle interfering with the removing
or plowing of snow, or the removing of ice, from any public way, and to
impose liability for the cost of such removal and the storage charges, if any,
resulting therefrom, upon the owner or the person in possession of such
vehicle.
§ 206-7. Violations and penalties. [Amended 5-18-1976, approved
9-13-1976]
Hereafter, anyone who shall place snow or ice upon any street in violation
of this article, or who shall fail to remove any vehicle interfering with the
removal or plowing of snow or ice from a public way shall be subject to a
fine not to exceed $50 for each offense.
§ 206-5 SOLID WASTE § 206-7
202:257

ARTICLE III
Temporary Repairs on Private Ways
[Adopted 5-6-1989, approved 6-30-1989 (Art. XXXI of Ch. III of the
General Ordinances as updated through 7-7-2003)]
§ 206-8. Certain repairs authorized upon petition of abutters.
[Amended 10-2-2014 by Order No. 2015-019]
Upon petition of 51% or more of the abutters thereof, the Town may in
the discretion of the Town Manager, provide temporary repairs including
drainage, the nature of which is not likely to have a service life expectancy
greater that 15 years and is required by public necessity, on any private way
which has been open to public use for more than five years.
§ 206-9. Liability for damages.
The Town shall not be liable for any damages caused by any activity herein
provided.
§ 206-10. Deposit; assessment of betterments.
A nonreturnable cash deposit of $100 shall be required with the submission
of the petition to cover the cost of field inspection and initial cost estimates.
Where all administrative, engineering and repair costs associated with
the temporary repairs is less that $500 per abutter, a cash sum shall be
deposited with the Town Treasurer equal to the costs of repair prior to the
work being commenced. Where the costs per abutter is $500 or greater for
repairs made under this article, betterments will be assessed. Any abutter
may, by paying the full amount of his share, avoid the assessment of the
betterment on his land.
§ 206-8 SOLID WASTE § 206-10
202:259
Chapter 208
SUBSTANCE CONTROLS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alcoholic beverages — See Ch. 20.
Cigarette vending machines — See Ch. 57.
Restricting the sale of tobacco
products — See Ch. 365.
Smoking — See Ch. 371.
§ 206-10 BARNSTABLE CODE § 206-10
202:260
ARTICLE I
Synthetic Marijuana and Synthetic Marijuana Analogue
[Adopted 9-3-2015 by Order No. 2016-017]
§ 208-1. Purpose and intent.
It has been determined that certain businesses and/or individuals within
the Town of Barnstable are possessing and selling certain substances which
when ingested produce intoxicating effects similar to Tetrahydrocannabinol
(THC) or marijuana. These substances, which are described herein, are
often used as an alternative synthetic to marijuana and are potentially
dangerous to users and society, and the long-term effects are not yet known.
The effects of these substances are a health concern to the citizens of
Barnstable. Not all of the substances are categorized as illegal controlled
substances under state or federal law. By selling these legal substances for
smoking and ingestion in the guise of incense, the manufacturers avoid the
United States Food and Drug Administration process for study and approval
of such prior to distribution for consumption. In addition, by marketing
such incense products directed at the controlled drug subculture, the
manufacturers and sellers avoid the schedule implications of the Controlled
Substances Act. The Town of Barnstable Town Council recognizes there is
no legitimate purpose for such synthetic chemicals contained therein.
§ 208-2. Prohibited activities.
§ 208-3. Exceptions.
It shall be unlawful for any person to possess, sell, barter, give, publicly
display for sale; attempt to possess, sell, barter, or give; or transport
any material, compound, mixture or preparation within the corporate
limits of the Town of Barnstable which contains any quantity of
synthetic marijuana or synthetic marijuana analogue.
A.
This article shall apply regardless of whether the synthetic marijuana or
synthetic marijuana analogue is described as tobacco, herbs, incense,
spice, bath salts, plant food or any blend thereof, and, regardless of
whether the substance is marketed for the purpose of being smoked or
ingested, and, regardless of whether the substance is marked "not for
human consumption."
B.
It is not an offense under this article if the person was acting at
the direction of the Barnstable Police Department and its officers, or
federal or state law enforcement, to enforce or ensure compliance with
this article prohibiting the sale of the aforementioned substances.
A.
If the Commonwealth of Massachusetts enacts criminal penalties for
the possession, sale, transportation, or delivery of any chemical
substance listed in this article, then upon the effective date of such
enactment, this article shall no longer be deemed effective for that
substance. However, a violation of this article occurring prior to the
B.
§ 208-1 SOLID WASTE § 208-3
202:261
§ 208-4. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, the following words shall have the following
meanings.
PERSON — An individual, corporation, limited liability company,
partnership, wholesaler, retailer, and any license or unlicensed business,
including clerk, manager, or owner of the business.
SYNTHETIC MARIJUANA — Any substance as defined by 21 U.S.C. § 812(d),
excluding "marihuana" as such term is defined in MGL c. 94C, § 1, 21 U.S.C.
§ 812(d) notwithstanding; or any one or any combination of the following
cannabinoids, or, a substance containing any one or combination of the
following cannabinoids, namely JWH-018, JWH-073, CP-47, 497, JWH-200,
or, cannabicyclohexanol; or vegetable material that has been chemically
treated and is possessed, sold, or, purchased with the intent that it will,
despite any labeling to the contrary, be consumed by humans for the
purpose of voluntary intoxication, said vegetable material typically having a
retail price of over $5 per ounce and contained within packaging indicating
that the contents is not for human consumption, and which, if consumed,
may induce an effect or effects of intoxication similar to a controlled
substance or imitation controlled substance, said effect or effects to include
elation, euphoria, dizziness, excitement, irrational behavior, exhilaration,
paralysis, stupefaction, dulling of the senses or nervous system, or,
distortion of audio, visual or mental processes.
SYNTHETIC MARIJUANA ANALOGUE — A substance, the chemical
structure of which is substantially similar to the chemical structure of
synthetic marijuana and which has a stimulant, depressant, or
hallucinogenic effect on the central nervous system that is substantially
similar to or greater than the stimulant, depressant, or hallucinogenic effect
on the central nervous system of synthetic marijuana; or with respect
to a particular person, which such person represents or intends to have
a stimulant, depressant, or hallucinogenic effect on the central nervous
system that is substantially similar to or greater than the stimulant,
depressant, or hallucinogenic effect on the central nervous system of
synthetic marijuana.
§ 208-5. Violations and penalties.
effective date of such enactment may be prosecuted after the effective
date of state enactment.
Any person found to be in violation of this article will be assessed a fine
of $300. Each day a violation occurs will constitute a separate offense.
A.
In addition to any penalty provided in the above Subsection A, if any of
the aforementioned substances listed above are found in the possession
of any person, the substance will be forfeited by seizure by the
Barnstable Police Department, or its officers, and may be destroyed by
such law enforcement officials in a method consistent with law.
B.
§ 208-3 BARNSTABLE CODE § 208-6
202:262
§ 208-6. Severability.
If any provision of this article shall be held to be invalid by a court of
competent jurisdiction, then such provision shall be considered separately
and apart from the remaining provisions of this article, which shall remain
in full force and effect.
§ 208-6 SOLID WASTE § 208-6
202:263
Chapter 210
SWIMMING POOLS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Noncriminal disposition — See Ch. 1, Art. I.
§ 210-1. Fencing required.
Private swimming pools shall be suitably fenced to a minimum height of four
feet. Public and semipublic swimming pools shall be suitably fenced to a
minimum height of six feet. Such fence shall be constructed so as to prohibit
unauthorized access.
§ 210-2. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating the provisions of this chapter shall be punished by a
fine not to exceed $20 for each offense.
Chapter 217
TOURIST CAMPS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Inspection of wires — See Ch. 68, Art. I.
§ 217-1. Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, certain words and phrases are defined, and
certain provisions shall be construed, as herein set out, unless it shall be
apparent from their context that a different meaning is intended:
CAMP COTTAGE — Construed to mean any building or structure, house car,
camp car, or auto-trailer, used for, or adaptable to use for, living quarters.
TOURIST CAMP AND PARK SITE — Any place where two or more camp
cottages are located, or any premises designed or intended for the purpose
of supplying to the public a location for a camp cottage.
UNIT DEFINED — A section of ground in any tourist camp used, or
designed for use, as a location for a single camp cottage.
§ 217-2. Permission of Town Manager required.
No tourist camp or park shall be permitted to be located on any land, park
or beach land owned or controlled by the Town of Barnstable except as
permitted by the Town Manager.
§ 208-6 BARNSTABLE CODE § 217-3
210:264
§ 217-3. Camp cottages restricted to tourist camps; area
requirements. [Amended 3-6-1956, approved 5-15-1956]
It shall be unlawful to locate or use as living or sleeping quarters any camp
cottage on any premises other than those contained within a tourist camp
duly permitted and maintained pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, or
to permit the same to be done on any premises. No unit shall contain less
than 600 feet in area, and no unit shall be permitted to accommodate more
than one camp cottage.
§ 217-4. Tourist camp permit; fees.
It shall be unlawful for any person to establish or maintain, or to permit to
be established or maintained upon any property owned or controlled by him,
a tourist camp in the Town of Barnstable, unless there exists a valid permit
therefor granted and existing in compliance with the provisions of this
chapter and of the ordinances of the Town of Barnstable. The application for
such permit shall be accompanied by plans of the proposed tourist camp,
showing the location of all buildings, driveways, toilet facilities, showers,
laundry facilities, slop sinks and other improvements. Public notice of the
application for permit shall be given by the Town Manager and the same
procedure followed out as applicable to conversion of lands from residential
to business uses as set forth under Chapter 240, Zoning, of the Code of the
Town of Barnstable. A permit fee as provided in Chapter 76, Fees, Article II,
Schedule of Fees, per tourist camp shall be charged before any such permit
shall be issued, and a renewal fee shall be paid each year during existence
of such permit, and in the said amount as provided in the Schedule of Fees,
per tourist camp maintained within the tourist camp.
§ 217-5. Plumbing and sanitary requirements.
Every permanent camp cottage that is maintained within a tourist camp
unit shall be improved and provided with at least one toilet, one bathtub
or shower, one wash basin and one kitchen sink.
A.
All tourist camp units which are not improved with permanent
structures for living quarters shall be provided with a minimum, for
each six, of one toilet and one bathtub or shower for every 10 units.
Such toilets and urinals shall be not more than 200 feet removed from
the unit served by them. A two-compartment laundry tub, a slop sink,
and a wash basin, with running water, shall be provided for every eight
units or fraction thereof.
B.
All plumbing work shall be in compliance with plumbing regulations
and ordinances of the Town of Barnstable, and subject to inspection by
the Inspector of Plumbing of the Town.
C.
No dry or chemical closets shall be installed or used within any tourist
camp site, and all such closets shall be sealed while within the limits of
the Town of Barnstable.
D.
§ 217-3 TOURIST CAMPS § 217-5
217:265
§ 217-6. Electrical requirements and lights.
§ 217-7. Record of guests.
Every tourist camp shall maintain a manager in charge thereof. Such
manager shall require all tourists or other persons using such tourist camp
to register in a book kept for that purpose. He shall also keep a record of
the name, address and car license number of each occupant of such tourist
camp, which record shall at all times be open to inspection by the Police
Department.
§ 217-8. Limitation on residence.
It shall be unlawful for any person, except the manager and his bona fide
employees, to remain or live in any tourist camp for more than 90 days
in any six-month period, and it shall be unlawful for any tourist camp
permittee or his agent to permit any person to remain in the tourist camp
under the control of such permittee or his agent longer than the period
herein allowed.
§ 217-9. Fire prevention regulations.
There shall be maintained at all times in every tourist camp at least one
approved fire extinguisher for every five units. Cooking and heating
equipment installed in a tourist camp shall have the approval of the Chief
of the Fire Department of the Fire District wherein such tourist camp is
located, before such equipment shall be put to use.
A sufficient number of tightly covered cans for garbage disposal shall
be installed. Garbage so collected shall be deposited in the Town
garbage disposal area at least twice in the week by the camp manager.
E.
Every tourist camp and all structures therein shall be constructed and
maintained at all times in a thoroughly sanitary condition.
F.
Every tourist camp shall be provided with adequate means of lighting
the same by medium of electricity, provided that electrical service is
available.
A.
All electric wiring, distributing systems and equipment for distributing
electricity in said tourist camps shall be subject to the provisions in
all laws relating thereto of Chapter 68, Electrical Standards, Article I,
Inspection of Wires. If in the opinion of the Inspector of Wires and the
Town of Barnstable he shall deem it to be the best interests of public
safety and welfare, all or any part of any electric system may be by him
required to be placed underground.
B.
Lights shall be provided at all toilets and baths and shall be kept lighted
from 1/2 hour after sunset until 1/2 hour before sunrise.
C.
§ 217-5 BARNSTABLE CODE § 217-10
217:266
§ 217-10. Exemptions. [Amended 3-27-1973, approved 7-29-1974]
This chapter shall not apply to Sandy Neck or to properties in use at the
time of its adoption.
§ 217-11. Rules and regulations.
The Town Manager of the Town of Barnstable shall have the power to
promulgate rules and regulations for the enforcement of the provisions of
this chapter, and for the purpose of insuring the maintenance of tourist
camps and structures therein in a manner compatible with public health
and safety.
Chapter 220
TOWN COUNCIL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Legislative branch — See Part II of Charter. Appointments Committee — See Ch. 37, Art. I
§ 217-10 TOURIST CAMPS § 217-11
217:267

ARTICLE I
Meetings
[Adopted 2-1-1990; amended 1-4-1996 by Order No. 96-085 (Art. I
of Ch. I of the General Ordinances as updated through 7-7-2003);
9-29-2016 by Order No. 2017-015]
§ 220-1. Regular meetings.
Regular meetings of the Barnstable Town Council shall be held on two
Thursdays per month, except during July and August, when regular
meetings shall be held on one Thursday per month. The dates of regular
meetings shall be approved by a majority vote of the Town Council in
December of each year for the following calendar year. No regular meeting
shall be scheduled on a solemn or legal holiday.
§ 220-2. Special meetings.
Special meetings of the Town Council may be held on the call of the
President of the Town Council, or on the call of any four or more members,
by written notice. Said notice shall include agenda items and pertinent
documents pertaining to those items which will be delivered to the Town
Clerk and to each Councilor at least 48 hours in advance of the time set. No
special meeting shall be scheduled on a solemn or legal holiday.
§ 220-3. Cancellation and rescheduling of meetings.
§ 220-4. Time and place of meetings.
Meetings shall commence at 7:00 p.m. at the Town Hall.
If the President of the Council determines that an exigent circumstance
exists which makes it either infeasible or impracticable to hold a
scheduled meeting, the President may cancel said meeting. Notice of
the canceled meeting shall be posted at the Town Hall meeting room
and on the Town's website unless the exigent circumstances prevent
such posting.
A.
If, for any reason, a meeting is canceled, the President may reschedule
a special meeting to replace the canceled meeting. If the canceled
meeting was the only regular meeting scheduled for that month, then
the rescheduled meeting shall be a regular meeting.
B.
§ 220-1 TOURIST CAMPS § 220-4
217:269

ARTICLE II
Submission of Legislation to General Court
[Adopted 5-7-1992 (Art. XIX of Ch. II of the General Ordinances as
updated through 7-7-2003)]
§ 220-5. Authorization of Town Council to submit.
Pursuant to Section 8 of Article 89 of the amendments to the Constitution
of the commonwealth, the Town Council of the Town is the only legislative
body of the Town empowered to submit special legislation on behalf of
the inhabitants of the Town to the General Court, in a manner as further
prescribed by this article.
§ 220-6. Process for submittal to the Town Council.
All petitions for special legislation to the General Court, by any officer,
official or employee of the Town, shall first be submitted to the Town
Manager and Town Attorney for their review and placement upon the Town
Council agenda, through the Town Clerk.
§ 220-7. Testimony on special legislation.
Any officer, official or employee of the Town who seeks to provide testimony
on special legislation affecting the Town shall first notify the Town Manager,
who shall next advise the Council President of such testimony. The Council
President and Town Manager shall seek to ensure that such testimony is
consistent with the actions of the Town Council concerning such special
legislation.
§ 220-8. Right of free petition.
Nothing in this article shall prohibit any officer, official or employee of the
Town from exercising their individual right of free petition and testimony
concerning same, as guaranteed by the Constitution of the commonwealth,
including an officer, official or employee's petition of general legislation
made consequent to their affiliation in professional associations within the
commonwealth.
§ 220-9. Requests by special districts. [Added 6-1-1995 by Order
No. 95-185]
Whenever the Council shall receive a request which has been forwarded
to it pursuant to a vote of a meeting of a special district of the Town
which lies entirely within the boundaries of the Town for a petition to
the General Court for special legislation relating to that district, it shall
forthwith be placed on the Council agenda for consideration by the Council,
notwithstanding whether any Councilor sponsors the petition as an agenda
item.
§ 220-5 TOURIST CAMPS § 220-9
217:271

ARTICLE III
Televising of Meetings
[Adopted 3-21-1996 by Order No. 96-118 (Art. V of Ch. I of the
General Ordinances as updated through 7-7-2003)]
§ 220-10. Suspension of requirement for televising meetings.
[Amended 1-20-2005 by Order No. 2005-038]
All meetings of the Town Council and School Committee shall be televised,
unless, by a vote of 2/3 of those present and voting, because of emergency
conditions or some other substantial reason stated as part of the vote, the
body in question suspends the requirements hereof. Nothing contained in
this article shall be so construed as to conflict with the requirements of MGL
Chapter 39, § 23A et seq.
§ 220-11. Utilization of signals by outside broadcast systems.
The Town shall permit outside broadcast systems to utilize signals
originating from these meetings, so long as all costs related to such use are
paid for by the entity requesting said use.
§ 220-10 TOURIST CAMPS § 220-11
217:273

ARTICLE IV
Compensation of Councilors and Officers
[Adopted 11-20-1997 by Order No. 98-035 (Art. III of Ch. I of the
General Ordinances as updated through 7-7-2003); amended in its
entirety 3-15-2007 by Order No. 2007-07625]
§ 220-12. Town Councilors.
The compensation for Town Councilors shall be $8,000 per year.
§ 220-13. President.
The compensation for the President shall be $12,000 per year.
§ 220-14. Vice President.
The compensation for the Vice President shall be $10,000 per year.
§ 220-15. Expense allowance. [Amended 4-16-2015 by Order No.
2015-13526]
There will be an expense allowance for Town Councilors and the Vice
President of $2,200 per year, and for the President, an expense allowance
of $2,800 per year.
25.Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided that it shall take effect on 1-1-2008 and be
reviewed by the Town Council annually thereafter for possible change as required under
Section 2-12 of the Charter of the Town of Barnstable.
26.Editor's Note: This order also set forth that it takes effect 1-1-2016 and is to be reviewed
annually as required by Section 2-12 of the Town Charter.
§ 220-12 TOURIST CAMPS § 220-15
217:275
Chapter 221
TREES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Noncriminal disposition — See Ch. 1, Art. I.
Tree height restrictions near airport — See
Ch. 13.
Tree Warden — See Ch. 138, Art. I.
Christmas tree sales — See Ch. 141, Art. II.
Scenic roads — See Ch. 180.
Care of trees during excavations — See Ch.
404.
Subdivision Rules and Regulations — See Ch.
801.
§ 220-15 BARNSTABLE CODE § 220-15
221:276
ARTICLE I
Preamble; Purpose; Definitions
§ 221-1. Preamble.
§ 221-2. Purpose.
It is the expressed policy of the Town of Barnstable to enhance the
appearance of the Town by beautifying roadways and public property with
shade trees and, in so doing, improve property values and the economy. The
Town has invested substantial resources to plant and maintain trees, and
these trees belong to the citizens of the Town. The Town also recognizes the
need for a highly reliable network of public utilities to supply businesses,
homes, hospitals, and other services, in an area subject to frequent storms
and high winds.
§ 221-3. Definitions.
Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meaning of terms
used in this chapter shall be as follows:
In order to maintain and enhance the architectural character,
streetscapes and scenic views along the Town's roadways of which
trees are an integral part, the Town hereby reiterates its established
policy with regard to wires and cables along roadways: Since 1926
the Town has established policies for the placement of utility wires
and cables underground. Underground utilities were first articulated in
"The Preliminary Survey for a Town Plan for the Town of Barnstable,"
dated October 1926, and more recently in the "Local Comprehensive
Plan" adopted by the Town Council October 1997 and approved by the
Cape Cod Commission 1998. Policy 7.3.3 states that all new utilities
shall be placed underground, and that all existing overhead utilities
shall be phased underground.
A.
All utilities should submit a program to the Town for phasing of utilities
underground in order to prevent continued damage to the Town's trees
by trimming, pruning and removals, and to prevent the constant
occurrence of power outages.
B.
Until such time as utilities are placed underground, bare wires should
be replaced with aerial spacer cable systems or covered wires, in order
to limit the amount of tree trimming and clearance, and maintain the
viability of the Town's trees. Such systems will also provide the highest
reliability of electrical service of any aboveground system available.
C.
The utilities should submit a program to the Town for replacement of
bare wires with covered conductors, and/or aerial spacer systems. The
utilities and the Town should establish priorities for this program. In
priority order, the Old Kings Highway (Rt. 6A), scenic roads, the Town
center and village commercial centers are the Town's first priorities for
such installation.
D.
§ 221-1 TREES § 221-3
221:277
TOWN TREES — Trees, shrubs and bushes within the Town's jurisdiction.
TREE TOPPING — The severe cutting back of limbs to stubs larger than
three inches in diameter within the tree's crown to such a degree so as to
remove the normal canopy and disfigure the tree.
VISION CLEARANCE — That area included within the street lines at points
which are 20 feet distant from their point of intersection measured along
said street lines which will materially obstruct the view of a driver of a
vehicle approaching a street intersection.
§ 221-3 BARNSTABLE CODE § 221-3
221:278
ARTICLE II
Permit Requirements
§ 221-4. Permit required.
A valid tree work permit shall be obtained prior to doing any of the following
work:
§ 221-5. Applicability.
This chapter shall not apply to:
§ 221-6. Application.
Application for a tree work permit shall be made to the Tree Warden a
minimum of 15 business days prior to commencement of the planned work,
except in an unforeseen emergency. Application for work on conservation
lands shall be submitted to the Conservation Commission.
§ 221-7. Clean up of brush and wood; stump removal.
All wood disposal is the responsibility of the utility or the contractor, except
when specific direction is given by the Department of Public Works or
the Conservation Commission to deliver to an in-town location. Chipping
of brush and cleanup of all stumps, wood and other debris shall be a
continuous operation. Stumps of trees shall be removed to the surface of
the ground so that tops of stumps do not project above the surface of the
ground, so that cleared areas can be maintained by mowing, and to provide
safe passage for pedestrians.
A. Trimming of Town trees.
Excavation within or adjacent to the public right-of-way or public
property which may disturb roots of Town trees, including but not
limited to the installation of utilities.
B.
C. Removal of Town trees.
The clearance of trees and brush under major, cross-country
transmission lines belonging to electric utility companies, except that
this chapter shall apply to work in the vicinity of such utility lines along
roadways.
A.
Work being done by the Town of Barnstable, or under contract to
the Town of Barnstable, except where tree removal is subject to the
jurisdiction of agencies listed in § 221-19 below.
B.
Maintenance and beautification of shrubs and trees within the public
right-of-way which overhang private property, by the adjacent property
owner, except that removal of any Town tree shall be subject to all
applicable laws and regulations pursuant to § 221-19 below.
C.
§ 221-4 TREES § 221-8
221:279
§ 221-8. Reimbursement of Tree Warden's time.
§ 221-9. Verification of ownership.
It is the obligation of the contractor to positively verify that trees to be
trimmed or removed are growing within the public right-of-way.
§ 221-10. Utility emergencies.
An emergency shall be considered to be breakage which threatens a power
location. The utility company or tree contractor shall notify the Tree Warden
of the emergency within two business days. In major emergencies, the
utility shall notify the Tree Warden as soon as reasonable after the
emergency.
§ 221-11. Supervision of all work on Town trees.
All work on Town trees shall be supervised in the field by an attending
Massachusetts certified arborist, who shall be responsible for the work
performed, and shall maintain regular contact with the Town's Tree Warden.
Both the contractor and the utility shall be responsible for ensuring that
the bucket operators are trained and knowledgeable of the standards of
this chapter, including the ANSI Standard Z-133, and National Arborist
Association (NAA) Pruning Standards.
§ 221-12. Suspension of permit; stop-work order.
The Tree Warden may cancel a permit or issue a stop-work order without
notice.
§ 221-13. Appeal.
The Trees Warden's decision under §§ 221-6 and 221-12 may be appealed to
the Town Manager.
The Town shall be reimbursed for the total cost of the time of the Tree
Warden, or his designee, and support staff, for reviewing work to the
Town's trees. Costs shall be assessed through permit application fees
or by direct billing.
A.
Fees may be waived for work done for the benefit of the Town, at the
discretion of the Tree Warden.
B.
§ 221-8 BARNSTABLE CODE § 221-13
221:280
ARTICLE III
Trimming
§ 221-14. Compliance required.
In order to minimize adverse impacts of pruning on the Town's trees,
all work performed shall comply with the following requirements and
standards.
§ 221-15. Pruning and trimming standards.
§ 221-16. Line clearance standards.
Trimming shall be done in such a manner as to protect current tree
health with all possible regard for future growth and development
A.
All work will be performed in compliance with ANSI Standard Z-133
and National Arborist Association (NAA) Pruning Standards.
B.
No major limb or a limb with a diameter greater than 15% of the tree
diameter at breast height (dbh) shall be removed unless approved by
the Tree Warden, prior to the commencement of trimming.
C.
D. Climbing irons shall not be used on any tree.
Unless otherwise authorized by the Tree Warden, it shall be unlawful
as a normal practice for any person or firm to top any Town tree. Trees
severely damaged by storms or other causes, or certain trees under
utility wires or other obstructions where other pruning practices are
impractical, may be exempted from this chapter at the determination of
the Tree Warden.
E.
A reasonable attempt shall be made to trim dead wood from the area
being worked.
F.
Trimming for utility line clearance shall protect the viability and proper
shape of a tree, and in no case shall trees be trimmed to provide
clearance to wires and cables in excess of the following standards:
The maximum clearance standards in Table 1 below, except under
well documented circumstances, for specific trees only, to be
approved by the Tree Warden; and
(1)
In no case shall tree trimming remove more than 15% of the leaf
surface in any one year, unless approved by the Tree Warden; and
(2)
Tree trimming for clearance to wires and cables shall be performed
for no more than three years' growth; and
(3)
In all cases tree trimming shall be reduced wherever possible,
especially on young trees.
(4)
A.
§ 221-14 TREES § 221-16
221:281
§ 221-17. Conflict with other laws.
Nothing in Article III shall conflict with the safety standards of the National
Electrical Code.
Maximum line clearance standards. See all other preceding sections
including but not limited to the following:
Subsection A(2): "In no case shall trimming remove more than 15%
of the leaf surface....."
(1)
Subsection A(3): "Tree trimming ... for no more than three years
growth."
Table 1
Type of Wire, Cable, or Device
Specification
(in feet)
120/240
Volts
2,400/4160
Volts Street
Lighting
13,800
Volts
Open wire
Lighting
25,000
Volts +
Open Wire
3,800 Volt
Spacer
(covered)
To overhanging
branch
5 10 12 12 8
Side trimming 2 2 6 8 2
Topping (to top of
tree beneath wire)
5 5 8 8 6
(2)
B.
§ 221-16 BARNSTABLE CODE § 221-17
221:282
ARTICLE IV
Tree Removal and Replanting
§ 221-18. Tree removal permits required.
A valid work permit shall be obtained from the Tree Warden for removal
of any Town tree, except that approval of the Conservation Commission
shall be required on conservation lands. Tree removal is subject to approval
including but not limited to the Tree Warden acting pursuant to MGL Ch.
87; the Planning Board along designated scenic roads pursuant to MGL
Ch. 40, § 15C, and Chapter 180, Scenic Roads, of the Code of the Town of
Barnstable, and the Old Kings Highway along Route 6A pursuant to MGL
Ch 61. In addition, tree removal may be subject to the Old Kings Highway
Regional District pursuant to MGL Ch. 470 of the Acts of 1973, as amended,
or any local Historic District, pursuant to MGL Ch. 40C, as amended. The
forgoing list is intended to be for convenience only and does not purport to
be exhaustive; this section shall not be construed as an exemption from or
a relaxation of any applicable requirements of law.
§ 221-19. Replacement of Town trees.
Town trees to be removed shall be replaced, subject to approval of a
plan detailing the species and location, by the entities with jurisdiction
listed in § 221-18 above. In the event that the tree replacement plan is
in dispute, the following methods for assessing replacement shall apply:
The value of a public tree being removed shall be assessed by
the Tree Warden based upon standards in the industry, and the
costs assessed to the applicant. Such costs shall be placed in
an account dedicated to the replacement planting of trees along
the Town's roadways. In evaluating tree value, the applicant for
tree removal may submit information based upon the Council of
Tree and Landscape Appraisers, trunk formula method, or other
nationally recognized methodology. Alternatively, the approving
entities listed in § 221-18 above may require the replanting of
street trees of equivalent value to the tree being removed.
(1)
Where a Town tree is being removed for safety reasons and the
value of the tree being removed has been reduced by previous
damage or trimming, the tree shall be replaced with a minimum
of two street trees, or the value thereof placed into an account
dedicated to tree replacement.
(2)
Any planned program of tree removal shall be subject to a tree
replacement program, specifying the numbers, location, type and
size of trees to be installed, and a maintenance program. Where
a general area program of Town tree removal is planned, the
approving entities listed in § 221-18 above may require
implementation of the tree replacement program at least three
growing seasons prior to commencement of the tree removal
program.
(3)
A.
§ 221-18 TREES § 221-19
221:283
All replacement trees shall have a minimum caliper of three inches,
unless a lesser caliper is approved for a smaller size class.
B.
Abutting property owners may plant street trees within the road layout,
provided that the Tree Warden grants approval and that the selection
and location of said trees are in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter.
C.
§ 221-19 BARNSTABLE CODE § 221-19
221:284
ARTICLE V
Tree Planting Standards
§ 221-20. Listing of trees acceptable for planting.
§ 221-21. Spacing between street trees.
§ 221-22. Planting near curbs and sidewalks.
§ 221-23. Planting near street corners and fire hydrants.
No tree shall be planted on public property to obstruct visual clearance of
any street corner, measured from the point of nearest intersecting curbs or
curblines nor within 10 feet of any fire hydrant.
The Tree Warden shall develop and maintain an up-to-date listing of
trees considered most desirable for new plantings along streets in the
following three size classes based on mature height:
(1) Small (under 20 feet).
(2) Medium (20 to 40 feet).
(3) Large (over 40 feet).
A.
Lists of trees not suitable for new plantings will also be developed and
maintained current by the Tree Warden.
B.
Street trees shall be planted on public property no closer together than
the following:
(1) Small size class: 20 feet.
(2) Medium size class: 30 feet.
(3) Large size class: 40 feet.
A.
An exception may be made to the above spacing for special plantings if
authorized by the Tree Warden.
B.
Street trees may be planted on public property no closer to any curb or
sidewalk than the following:
(1) Small size class: two feet.
(2) Medium size class: three feet.
(3) Large size class: four feet.
A.
An exception may be made to the above spacings for special plantings
if authorized by the Tree Warden.
B.
§ 221-20 TREES § 221-24
221:285
§ 221-24. Planting near overhead utilities.
No tree other than those species listed as small trees in § 221-20 of this
chapter, or trees with a columnar form, may be planted on public property
under or within 10 feet of any overhead utility wire, except where
authorized by the Tree Warden.
§ 221-25. Power of Town to plant, maintain and remove trees and
shrubs.
The Town shall have the right to plant, maintain, and remove trees, plants
and shrubs within the lines of all Town-owned streets, alleys, avenues,
lanes, squares and other public property that may be necessary to insure
public safety or to preserve or enhance the symmetry and beauty of such
public property.
§ 221-26. Installation of tree lights.
With the approval of the Town Manager and the Tree Warden,
decorative lights may be installed in Town-owned trees on public
property for periods which will not interfere with the proper growth
and maintenance of the trees and when the occasion for the lights is
deemed appropriate.
A.
Unless otherwise authorized, holiday lights shall be installed no earlier
than November 1 and removed no later than March 15.
B.
§ 221-24 BARNSTABLE CODE § 221-26
221:286
ARTICLE VI
Tree Removal From Private Property
§ 221-27. Hazardous or diseased trees.
A tree located on private property which constitutes a hazard to life and
property in the Town right-of-way or adjacent private property, or harbors
disease for which the removal of such tree will eliminate a potential threat
to other trees within the Town shall be removed by the owners at their
expense within 60 days following written notification by the Tree Warden.
In the event the owners fail to comply with such notification, the Town shall
have the right to remove or cause to have removed such trees and charge
the cost of removal to the owners. Any person owning property in the Town
and who qualifies on the basis of 125% of the federal poverty guidelines
may petition the Town Manager for removal of a diseased tree or one which
constitutes a hazard to life and limb by Town forces at no charge.
§ 221-28. Pruning trees which endanger public safety.
The Tree Warden may permit the pruning of any tree or shrub on private
property when it endangers public safety by interfering with the proper
spread of light along the street from a street light, or interferes with
visibility of any traffic control device or sign or sight distance at
intersections.
§ 221-27 TREES § 221-28
221:287

ARTICLE VII
Trees on Public Property and Town-Owned Trees
§ 221-29. Plan for care of street and park trees.
The Tree Warden shall develop, update annually, and administer a
comprehensive plan for the care, preservation, pruning, planting,
replanting, removal or disposition of trees and shrubs in parks, along
streets, and in other public property. The plan shall be submitted in June
of each year to the Town Manager via the Superintendent of Public Works
and upon their acceptance and approval shall constitute the official tree
plan for the Town of Barnstable. The standards and specifications contained
within the plan shall apply not only to work performed by Town forces but
any private individuals or contractors who perform work on public property.
Nothing in said plan shall be inconsistent with this chapter.
§ 221-30. Harming Town-owned trees.
It shall be unlawful to trim, prune or remove any Town tree without the
approval of the Tree Warden and where applicable, approval of the entities
listed in § 121-18 above, or to harm a Town tree by removing or otherwise
damaging the bark and by attaching signs or any other item to any part of
the tree using nails or other device that punctures the bark.
§ 221-29 TREES § 221-30
221:289

ARTICLE VIII
Enforcement
§ 221-31. Severability.
If any provision of this chapter is held invalid by a court of competent
jurisdiction, the remainder of the chapter shall not be affected thereby. The
invalidity of any section or sections or parts of any section or sections of
this chapter shall not affect the validity of the remaining sections or parts
of sections or the other ordinances of the Town of Barnstable.
§ 221-32. Violations and penalties.
Violation of any provision of this chapter shall be punished by a fine of not
more than $300 for each offense. Each act causing damage to a separate
tree shall constitute a separate offense. This chapter may be enforced by
noncriminal disposition methods of the Town of Barnstable.
§ 221-31 TREES § 221-32
221:291
Chapter 224
VACANT AND FORECLOSING PROPERTIES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Numbering of buildings — See Ch. 51.
Building and premises maintenance — See
Ch. 54.
Historic properties — See Ch. 112.
Rental property — See Ch. 170.
§ 224-1. Purpose.
Unsecured and unmaintained vacant properties and foreclosing properties
present a danger to the safety and welfare of public safety officers, the
public, occupants and abutters, contribute to blight within neighborhoods
and commercial areas, and, as such, constitute a public nuisance. This
chapter is enacted to promote the health, safety and welfare of the public,
to protect and preserve the quiet enjoyment of occupants, abutters and
neighborhoods, and to minimize hazards to public safety personnel
inspecting or entering such properties.
§ 224-2. Definitions.
The following words and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the
following meanings:
FIRE CHIEF — The Fire Chief of the Fire District in which any property
subject to this chapter is located, or his or her designee.
FORECLOSING — The process by which a property, placed as security for
a real estate loan, is prepared for sale to satisfy the debt if the borrower
defaults.
INITIATION OF THE FORECLOSURE PROCESS — Taking any of the
following actions:
MAINTENANCE — Keeping property in good sanitary condition and repair,
including, without limitation the following: securing the property by locking
and boarding of buildings; draining or covering swimming pools and fencing
the immediate areas surrounding swimming pools; and removal from the
property of perishable food items, dangerous substances or chemicals,
A. Taking possession of a residential property pursuant to MGL c. 244, § 1.
Commencing a foreclosure action on a property in any court of
competent jurisdiction, including, without limitation, filing a complaint
in Land Court under the Service Members Civil Relief Act, Public Law
108-189 (50 U.S.C. App. §§ 501-596).
B.
In any instance, where the mortgage authorizes the mortgagee entry to
make repairs upon the mortgagor's failure to do so.
C.
§ 221-32 BARNSTABLE CODE § 224-2
221:292
animal litter, debris, trash, indoor items, such as furniture, appliances,
plumbing fixtures and bedding, not kept in a building, and snow from
adjacent sidewalks.
MORTGAGEE — The creditor, including, but not limited to, service
companies, agents, lenders in a mortgage agreement, and any successor in
interest and/or assignee of the mortgagee's rights, interests or obligations
under the mortgage agreement.
OWNER — Every person, entity, service company, property manager or real
estate broker who or which, alone or severally with others:
PROPERTY — Any real property, or portion thereof, located in the Town,
including municipally owned and commercial properties, and buildings or
structures situated on the property; provided, however, that "property" shall
not include property owned or under the control of the commonwealth or
the United States of America.
VACANT — Any property not currently legally occupied and not properly
maintained and secured, but not including any property unoccupied on
a seasonal basis only and properly secured and maintained while so
unoccupied.
Has legal title to any real property, including but not limited to a
dwelling, dwelling unit, mobile dwelling unit, or parcel of land, vacant
or otherwise, including a mobile home park; or
A.
Has care, charge or control of real property, including but not limited
to any dwelling, dwelling unit, mobile dwelling unit, or parcel of land,
vacant or otherwise, including a mobile home park, or any
administrator, administratrix, executor, trustee or guardian of the
estate of the holder of legal title; or
B.
Is a mortgagee of any such property who has initiated the foreclosure
process as defined in this chapter; or
C.
Is an agent, trustee or other person appointed by the courts and vested
with possession or control of any such property; or
D.
Is an officer or trustee of the association of unit owners of a
condominium. Each such person is bound to comply with the provisions
of these minimum standards as if he were the owner. However, "owner"
shall not mean a condominium association created pursuant to MGL
c. 183A to the extent that such association forecloses on or initiates
the foreclosure process for unpaid assessments due or owing to the
association; or
E.
F. Operates a rooming house; or
Is a trustee who holds, owns or controls mortgage loans for mortgagebacked
securities transactions and has initiated the foreclosure
process.
G.
§ 224-2 TREES § 224-3
221:293
§ 224-3. Registration and maintenance requirements for
foreclosing properties.
§ 224-4. Registration and maintenance requirements for vacant
properties, including foreclosing and foreclosed properties.
Any mortgagee of foreclosing property shall, unless exempt from such
actions by Massachusetts General Laws, within 15 days of the initiation
of the foreclosure process, provide written notification to the Building
Commissioner and the Fire Chief of the status of such property,
including in such notice the names, addresses, telephone numbers
and e-mail addresses of the mortgagee's employees or representatives
responsible for conducting the foreclosure, including mortgagee entry
to make repairs, and the owner or person in control of the property; the
location of the property; whether the property is vacant and, if so, the
length of time of the vacancy, both past and estimated for the future,
to the best of the owner's or mortgagee's knowledge or belief; and the
nature of the contents of the building.
A.
Any mortgagee of foreclosing property shall maintain the property as
required by and in accordance with the provisions of Subsections A
and B of § 224-4, unless exempt from such actions by Massachusetts
General Laws.
B.
When the Building Commissioner, upon receipt of a complaint or other
information and after making inquiries, determines that a property is
vacant as defined herein, the Commissioner shall proceed as follows:
If the property is foreclosing or has been foreclosed and the
mortgagee has entered to make repairs or exercised any incidents
of possession or ownership, including, without limitation, resorting
to mortgage provisions for preservation of the property, changing
locks, or payment of utilities or taxes, the Commissioner shall
require compliance within the time provided in § 224-3, if
necessary, and with Subsection B of this § 224-4 within 30 days,
unless exempt from such actions by Massachusetts General Laws.
(1)
If the property is not foreclosing, or a mortgagee has not become
the owner at foreclosure, the Building Commissioner shall then
inform the owner of the requirements of Subsection B of this
§ 224-4 and require that the owner submit a plan within 30 days for
bringing the property into compliance with Subsection B within 30
days of submission of the owner's plan, or such additional time as
the owner may request and which the Commissioner determines to
be reasonable.
(2)
The Commissioner may waive the provisions of Subsection A(1) and
(2) if the property is a nuisance or danger pursuant to MGL c. 139
and procedures promulgated thereunder.
(3)
A.
§ 224-3 BARNSTABLE CODE § 224-4
221:294
Owner or mortgagee responsibilities. [Amended 10-1-2015 by Order
No. 2016-029]
Any owner or mortgagee of a vacant property, having taken
ownership or possession as provided in Subsection A(1) of this
§ 224-4, shall also comply with the following within the time
periods set forth in Subsection A:
Register the property as a mortgagee irrespective of entry into
ownership or possession as a mortgagee as provided under
§ 224-3A.
(a)
As may be required by the Fire Chief for commercial property,
file one set of space utilization floor plans for any buildings on
said property with the Fire Chief and one set of said plans with
the Building Commissioner and certify space utilization plans
as accurate twice annually, in January and July.
(b)
Secure all windows and door openings and ensure that the
building is secured from all unauthorized entry continuously
in accordance with the United States Fire Administration
National Arson Prevention Initiative Board Up Procedures or
provide twenty-four-hour on-site security personnel on the
property.
(c)
(d) Post "No Trespassing" signs on the property.
(e) Ensure that structures are maintained in sound condition.
(f) Maintain lawns and shrubs free from excessive overgrowth.
Maintain the property in accordance with the Barnstable
Zoning Ordinance,27 the definition of "maintenance" in this
chapter, and any other provision of this chapter; and dispose
of trash, debris and pools of stagnant water as provided in
Chapter 54 of the Town of Barnstable General Ordinances
concerning the maintenance of property.
(g)
Maintain all fences around swimming pools or install fences as
required by Chapter 210 of the Barnstable General Ordinances
and maintain existing fences or install fences around spas.
(h)
Provide the Fire Chief and Building Commissioner with the
name, local address, telephone number and e-mail address of
a responsible person, if different from the person named in
the registration under § 224-3A, who can be contacted in case
of emergency and cause the name and contact number to be
marked on the front of the property as may be required by the
Fire Chief or Building Commissioner.
(i)
(1)
B.
27.Editor's Note: See Ch. 240, Zoning.
§ 224-4 TREES § 224-4
221:295
§ 224-5. Signs and markings.
When required pursuant to this chapter, signs or markings shall be applied
on the front of the property, and elsewhere as the Fire Chief or Building
Commissioner may require, and shall not be placed over doors, windows
or other openings. All signs/markings shall be visible from the street and,
when requested by the Fire Chief or Building Commissioner, shall be placed
on the sides and rear of the property. Signs/markings shall be a minimum
of 24 inches by 24 inches, with lines of two-inch width, and shall have
a reflective background or be painted with reflective paint in contrasting
colors. Signs/markings shall be applied directly on the surface of the
property and shall state the date of posting and the most recent date of
inspection by the Fire Chief and Building Commissioner.
§ 224-6. Properties with certificate of compliance; continuing duty
to comply.
Upon satisfactory compliance with the applicable provisions of §§ 224-3
through and including 224-5, the Building Commissioner shall issue a
certificate of compliance. Said certificate shall be valid for the length of
the vacancy or initiation of foreclosure, foreclosure, and vacancy following
foreclosure; provided, however, that the certificate shall be subject to
continued compliance with the provisions of this chapter. No owner of
a vacant property and no mortgagee required to maintain a foreclosing
property as provided in this chapter shall allow said property to become or
remain unsecured, or to contain an accumulation of rubbish, or to contain
excessive overgrowth, or to have a stagnant pool of water, or otherwise fail
to comply with this chapter.
Maintain liability insurance on the property and furnish the
Building Commissioner with a copy of said certificate of
insurance.
(j)
Drain all water from the plumbing between September 15 and
June 15 of each calendar year to guard against burst pipes.
(k)
A mortgagee of foreclosing property shall additionally provide the
following:
Schedule inspections with the Building Commissioner and
Health Director, who may at his or her discretion include the
Fire Chief, within a reasonable time after notification under
Subsection A(1) in order to confirm that the land and the
interior of all structures comply with the provisions of this
chapter and/or identify the provisions with which the property
does not comply and establish a program to bring the property
into full compliance; and
(a)
Notify the Building Commissioner in writing when the property
is sold or transferred.
(b)
(2)
§ 224-4 BARNSTABLE CODE § 224-7
221:296
§ 224-7. Properties without certificate of compliance; notice and
order to obtain certificate.
If it appears that any vacant or foreclosing property is unregistered, or
unsecured, contains rubbish, or contains excessive overgrowth of
vegetation or a stagnant pool or pools of water, the Building Commissioner,
upon being informed of such vacant or foreclosing property without a
certificate of compliance with this chapter, shall cause notice to issue
to the owner, as defined in this chapter, of the status of the property,
the requirements to register and secure the property, remove rubbish or
overgrowth, abate stagnant pools of water and maintain the property in
compliance with this chapter and order said person to obtain a certificate
of compliance. If any person fails to comply with said order, the Building
Commissioner and agents thereof may commence civil proceedings to
obtain injunctive relief or court orders, including recovery of any
unreimbursed expenses incurred by the Town to enter the property to
inspect, secure and clean the property and remove any pools of stagnant
water, together with the costs of the Town's response as a municipal
charges lien as provided in MGL c. 40 § 58.
§ 224-8. Expenses for court-ordered inspection and securing and
cleaning of property. [Amended 10-1-2015 by Order No. 2016-029]
The Building Commissioner may demand reimbursement for the expenses
incurred by the Town for actions taken to inspect and secure the property,
clean the property, and remove any stagnant pools of water, rubbish,
overgrowth of vegetation and snow under a court order obtained pursuant
to § 224-7.
§ 224-9. Notices.
Notices required pursuant to this chapter shall be served in the following
manner:
The Building Commissioner shall provide the owner or mortgagee with
a written statement of all associated costs.
A.
If the owner fails to pay or reimburse the Town within 30 days of the
notice of expenses, the Town may, as part of any court order sought
pursuant to § 224-6 or by a separate civil action, seek to recover the
balance due for reimbursement of its expenses incurred pursuant to
this section and establish a lien on the property to be recorded in the
Barnstable County Registry of Deeds or Land Registration.
B.
Personally on any owner as defined in this chapter, or on the contact
person specified pursuant to § 224-4A and B, as applicable; or
A.
Left at the last and usual place of abode of any owner, or the contact
person as specified pursuant to § 224-4A and B, as applicable, if such
place of abode is known and is within or without the commonwealth; or
B.
§ 224-7 TREES § 224-9
221:297
§ 224-10. Severability. [Added 10-1-2015 by Order No. 2016-02928]
The provisions of this chapter are severable. If any provision shall be held
to be invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, the
remaining provisions shall remain in full force and effect.
Chapter 228
VEHICLES AND BOATS, STORAGE OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Noncriminal enforcement of violations — See
Ch. 1, Art. I.
§ 228-1. Limit of boats and vehicles on premises. [Amended
10-1-2015 by Order No. 2016-02729]
No person shall have any unregistered boat, motor vehicle or trailer, any
or all of which are required by law to be registered, or any part or portion
thereof, ungaraged on premises owned, occupied or controlled by him or
her at any time unless screened from neighbors' view and from public
view by shrink wrap, fencing, evergreen trees or other plants capable of
providing year-round screening.
§ 228-2. Nonapplicability.
This chapter shall not apply to any vehicles used for agricultural purposes
nor shall it apply to premises duly licensed under the provisions of Chapter
140 of the General Laws.
§ 228-3. Violations and penalties.
Any person failing to remove such vehicle or vehicles, or any part or portion
thereof, within seven days, after notice by the Police Department of the
Town, shall be subject to a fine of not more than $300. Each day during any
portion of which violation is permitted to exist, shall constitute a separate
offense.
Chapter 232
By certified or registered mail, return receipt requested, to any owner,
or the contact person specified pursuant to § 224-4A and B, as
applicable.
C.
28.Editor's Note: This order also repealed former § 224-10, Review of provisions.
29.Editor's Note: This order also changed the name of Ch. 228 from "Vehicles, Storage of" to
"Vehicles and Boats, Storage of."
§ 224-9 BARNSTABLE CODE § 228-3
232:298
WASTEWATER DISCHARGE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Noncriminal disposition — See Ch. 1, Art. I.
Sewer use — See Ch. 184, Art. I.
Wetlands protection — See Ch. 237.
On-site sewage disposal systems — See Ch.
360.
Wells — See Ch. 397.
§ 232-1. Findings.
The health, safety and welfare of the residents of the Town of Barnstable
and its neighboring towns are dependent upon an adequate supply of pure
groundwater. The Town's entire drinking water supply is derived from
groundwater, and the United States Environmental Protection Agency has
designated all of Cape Cod as a "sole source aquifer" requiring special
care and protection. The groundwater system is internally connected with
surface waters, lakes, streams and coastal estuaries, which constitute
important recreational and economic resources of the Town. Contamination
of the aquifer and related surface water resources pose a serious threat to
the health, safety and financial well-being of the Town.
§ 232-2. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to protect the public health, safety and
welfare by maintaining quality groundwater through the regulation of the
volume of certain wastewater discharges.
§ 232-3. Compliance required for systems of certain capacity.
No person, company, corporation, entity, trust or firm shall install a new
individual on-site sewage disposal system which will produce more than
330 gallons per day of wastewater discharge unless in compliance with the
standards established by § 232-5 herein.
§ 232-4. Certification of compliance required.
A certificate of compliance with this chapter shall be received from the
Board of Health or its designee prior to the commencement of any activity
regulated by § 232-3 herein.
§ 232-5. Maximum allowable wastewater discharge. [Amended
12-16-1993 by Order No. 94-059]
Within zones of contribution to existing and proposed public supply
wells, the maximum allowable wastewater discharge from new
individual on-site sewage disposal systems shall not exceed 330 gallons
per acre per day.
A.
§ 228-3 WASTEWATER DISCHARGE § 232-5
232:299
§ 232-6. Additional limitation for areas near certain wells.
[Amended 12-16-1993 by Order No. 94-059; 6-14-2007 by Order No.
2007-141]
In addition to the standards of § 232-5 herein, within 2,000 feet of existing
and proposed public supply wells as shown on the map entitled "Revised
Groundwater Protection Map," Planning Division, dated February 2002,
the maximum allowable wastewater discharge from a new individual onsite
sewage disposal system shall not exceed 2,000 gallons per day, unless
located outside of the WP Zone to the existing and proposed public supply
wells.
§ 232-7. Flow rate determinations.
To determine compliance with §§ 232-5 and 232-6 herein, wastewater flow
rates shall be determined according to Title V of the State Environmental
Code, subject to the interpretation of the Board of Health.
§ 232-8. New system defined.
For the purposes of this chapter, the phrase "install a new individual onsite
sewage disposal system" shall not include the maintenance, repair and
alteration of an existing individual on-site sewage disposal system. However
in no case shall the discharge of wastewater increase beyond that present
prior to such maintenance, repair and alteration.
§ 232-9. Determining compliance of new systems with standards.
Any new system not in violation of the standards contained within §§ 232-5
through 232-8 shall be deemed to be in compliance with §§ 232-5 through
232-8.
§ 232-10. Administration; certificate of compliance.
This chapter shall be administered by the Board of Health or its designee
by verifying compliance with the provisions established herein. Within 10
Zones of contribution to public supply wells are shown on a map
entitled "Revised Groundwater Protection Map," Planning Division,
dated February 2002, which is on file in the office of the Town Clerk.
[Amended 6-14-2007 by Order No. 2007-141]
B.
The zones of contribution to public supply wells were determined by
SEA Consultants Inc. in their report dated September 1985, entitled
"Groundwater and Water Resource Protection Plan, Barnstable, MA,"
revised by SEA Consultants Inc., September 1989. The GP Overlay
District is also revised to include the zone of contribution to the West
Barnstable well #15-75 determined by the Cape Cod Commission; and
the zone of contribution to proven future Barnstable Fire District well
#8-90 determined by Whitman and Howard, Inc. The reports and maps
are on file with the Town Clerk.
C.
§ 232-5 BARNSTABLE CODE § 232-10
232:300
working days of receipt of a request for a certificate of compliance, the
Board of Health or its designee shall notify the applicants thereof as to
the approval or disapproval of the request. Upon determination that all
provisions of this chapter are being met, a certificate of compliance shall be
issued. However, in instances where an upgrading of an existing individual
on-site sewage disposal system is proposed, the Board of Health may
require from an applicant evidence that the proposed upgrading will not
adversely affect the groundwater quality.
§ 232-11. Enforcement; right of entry.
The provisions of this chapter shall be enforced by the Board of Health or
its designee, which may, according to law, enter upon any premises at any
reasonable time to inspect for compliance.
§ 232-12. Written notice of violation.
Written notice of any violation of this chapter shall be given by the Board
of Health or its designee specifying the nature of the violation and a time
within which compliance must be achieved.
§ 232-13. Violations and penalties.
Penalty for failure to comply with any provision of this chapter shall be $300
per day of violation.
§ 232-14. Severability.
Each provision of this chapter shall be construed as separate. If any part
of this chapter shall be held invalid for any reason, the remainder shall
continue in full force and effect.
Chapter 237
WETLANDS PROTECTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Wastewater discharge — See Ch. 232.
On-site sewage disposal systems — See Ch.
360.
Wells — See Ch. 397.
Subdivision Rules and Regulations — See Ch.
801.
§ 237-1. Purpose. [Amended 2-3-2011 by Order No. 2011-045]
The purpose of this chapter is to protect wetlands and related water
resources, and their values and functions, including, but not limited to,
the following: public or private water supply; groundwater; storm damage
prevention; flood control; erosion and sedimentation control; prevention of
water pollution; wildlife habitat; shellfish; fisheries; recreation; aesthetics;
§ 232-10 WASTEWATER DISCHARGE § 237-1
232:301
agricultural and aquacultural values; and historical values (collectively, "the
wetlands values protected by this chapter").
§ 237-2. Jurisdiction.
§ 237-3. Exceptions.
Except as permitted by the Conservation Commission or as provided
in this chapter in § 237-3, no person shall remove, fill, dredge, or alter
in or within 100 feet of the following resource areas: surface water
body, vegetated wetland or unvegetated wetland; any land under said
waters; and any land subject to flooding or inundation by groundwater,
surface water, tidal action or coastal storm flowage. In the event that
the Commission determines that an activity occurring beyond the limit
of jurisdiction noted above is having or has had a significant effect on
the wetlands values of a resource area, the Commission may require a
notice of intent or determination of applicability for that activity.
A.
In determining whether a resource area is subject to the provisions of
this chapter, the origin of the wetland, whether natural or man made, is
not a relevant factor.
B.
The permit and application required by this chapter shall not be
required for maintaining, repairing, or replacing (but not substantially
changing or enlarging), any existing and lawfully located structure or
facility used in the service of the public to provide electric, gas, water,
telephone, telegraph or other telecommunications services, sewage
collection and traffic control, provided written notice has been given
to the Commission prior to the commencement of work, and provided
that the work conforms to performance standards, design specification,
policy guidelines and other regulations adopted by the Commission.
A.
The permit and application required by this chapter shall not be
required for normal maintenance or improvement of land or waters
in an existing agricultural or aquacultural use. Expansion of existing
uses in these areas or new uses in areas within the jurisdiction of this
chapter will require a permit.
B.
The permit and application required by this chapter shall not apply to
emergency projects necessary for the protection of wetlands values or
the health and safety of the public, provided that the work is to be
performed by or has been ordered to be performed by an agency of the
commonwealth or a political subdivision thereof. For this work, advance
notice, oral or written, must be given to the Commission prior to or
within 24 hours after the commencement of work. The Commission
or its agent must certify the work to be an emergency project prior
to the commencement of work. The work must be performed only
for the time and place certified by the Commission for the limited
purposes necessary to abate the emergency, but in no instance shall the
emergency period exceed 30 days. All emergency work must conform
to the performance standards, design specifications, policy guidelines
C.
§ 237-1 BARNSTABLE CODE § 237-3
232:302
§ 237-4. Applications for permits and requests for determination.
§ 237-5. Notice and hearings.
and other regulations adopted by the Commission. Within 21 days of the
commencement of an emergency project, a permit application shall be
filed with the Commission for review as provided in this chapter. Upon
failure to meet these and other requirements of the Commission, the
Commission may, after notice and a public hearing, revoke or modify
an emergency project approval and order restoration and mitigation
measures.
Written applications shall be filed with the Commission to perform
activities regulated by this chapter affecting resource areas protected
by this chapter. The application shall include such information and
plans as are deemed necessary by the Commission to describe proposed
activities and their effects on wetlands, resource areas, and their
values. No activities shall commence without receiving a permit issued
pursuant to this chapter (except as provided in § 237-3).
A.
The Commission may, at its discretion, accept as the application and
plans under this chapter the notice of intent and plans filed under the
Wetlands Protection Act.
B.
Any person desiring to know whether or not a proposed activity of an
area is subject to this chapter may, in writing, request a determination
from the Commission. Such a request for determination shall contain
data and plans specified by the regulations of the Commission.
C.
At the time of an application or request the applicant shall pay a
filing fee specified in the regulations of the Commission. This fee is
in addition to that required by the Wetlands Protection Act. The
Commission may waive the filing fee and costs and expenses for an
application or request filed by a government agency, or if the applicant
can prove financial hardship, or other extenuating circumstances.
D.
Any person filing an application or a request for determination with
the Commission shall give written notice thereof, within 14 days of the
public hearing, by certified mail or hand delivery, to all abutters in
accordance with the regulations of the Commission.
A.
The Commission shall conduct a public hearing on any application
or request for determination. At the expense of the applicant, the
Commission shall cause written notice of the hearing to be published at
least five working days prior to the public hearing in a paper of general
circulation in the Town of Barnstable.
B.
The Commission shall commence the public hearing within 21 days
from the receipt of a completed notice of intent or request for
determination. The Commission or its agents shall determine, for
scheduling purposes only and in accordance with the submission
C.
§ 237-3 WASTEWATER DISCHARGE § 237-5
232:303
§ 237-6. Issuance or denial of permits; conditions.
§ 237-7. Wetlands replication.
regulations of the Commission, that the application or request is
complete. The twenty-one-day deadline for a hearing may be extended
by the Commission or its agents only with the assent of the applicant.
The Commission shall issue its decision on the notice of intent in
writing within 21 days of the close of the public hearing thereon. The
Commission shall issue its decision on the request for determination in
writing within 21 days of receipt of the request.
D.
The Commission in an appropriate case may combine its hearing under
this chapter with the hearing conducted under the Wetlands Protection
Act.
E.
The Commission may accept the applicant's request to continue the
public hearing to a date and time certain announced at the hearing,
for reasons stated at the hearing, which may include the receipt of
additional information offered by the applicant deemed necessary by
the Commission.
F.
If the Commission, after a public hearing, determines that the proposed
activities which are the subject of a notice of intent are not likely
to have a significant or cumulative effect upon the wetlands values
protected by this chapter, the Commission, within 21 days of the close
of the public hearing, shall issue a permit for the activities requested.
If it issues a permit, the Commission shall impose conditions which the
Commission deems necessary or desirable to protect those wetlands
values, and all activities shall be done in accordance with those
conditions.
A.
The Commission is empowered to deny a permit for failure to meet
the requirements of this chapter; for failure to submit necessary
information and plans required or requested by the Commission; for
failure to meet the design specifications, performance standards, policy
guidelines or other requirements in regulations of the Commission;
for failure to avoid or prevent unacceptable significant or cumulative
effects upon the wetlands values protected by this chapter; where it
is deemed that the denial is necessary to preserve the environmental
quality of resource areas; and where no conditions are adequate to
protect those values. Due consideration shall be given to any
demonstrated hardship on the applicant by reason of denial, as
presented at the public hearing.
B.
In order to protect the values inherent in wetland areas, it is the intent
of this chapter to preserve wetlands, surface water bodies and other
resource areas as functioning natural ecosystems. Filling of wetlands
is therefor prohibited except when mitigated by wetlands replication
as permitted in this section. At its discretion, the Conservation
A.
§ 237-5 BARNSTABLE CODE § 237-7
232:304
§ 237-8. Promulgation of standards, specifications and rules.
Commission may permit activities involving wetlands replication that
do not harm the wetlands values protected under this chapter.
Wetlands replication in order to make lands buildable, as by fulfilling
septic system setbacks, flood elevation requirements or other
construction setbacks, or to achieve lot area requirements, is
prohibited. Replication is prohibited in areas providing habitat for
existing rare or endangered species as listed by the Massachusetts
Natural Heritage Program.
B.
Replication may be permitted to provide access to otherwise buildable
uplands. Replication may also be permitted when an overriding public
purpose can be demonstrated. The creation of new wetlands may be
permitted, without any concomitant wetlands filling, when the
applicant can demonstrate that such creation will not harm existing
wetlands or their values. Purposes for creating new wetlands include,
but are not limited to, the absorption of stormwater runoff,
improvement of wildlife habitat, stabilization of unvegetated intertidal
areas, or aesthetic, experimental, or scientific purposes.
C.
No more than 2,500 square feet of wetland may be filled in accordance
with this section. The replicated wetland must be at least equal in size
to the wetland that is filled and properly vegetated. Where physically
possible, replicated wetlands shall be made contiguous with existing
natural wetlands. When a person owns abutting properties, any
applications on the properties for wetlands replication submitted within
the same calendar year shall be treated as one proposal for the purpose
of evaluating wetlands replication, and the combined area to be filled
shall not exceed 2,500 square feet.
D.
Due to the fact that replication is an experimental process and is
subject to failure, the Commission may require any applicant
requesting permission for wetlands replication to conduct a scientific
monitoring program to last for a time period as determined by the
Commission, but not to exceed five years. If said monitoring period is
less than five years, the Commission shall review the results at the end
of the monitoring period to determine if additional monitoring is needed
within the maximum five-year period. The applicant shall provide an
escrow bond for the duration of the monitoring period plus one year
to cover correction of any deficiencies revealed by the monitoring
program. Said bond shall, at a minimum, be equal to the initial cost of
the replication.
E.
After public notice and public hearing the Commission may, from time
to time, promulgate performance standards, design specifications,
policy guidelines and other rules and regulations to accomplish the
purposes of this chapter. Failure of the Commission to promulgate such
rules and regulations or a legal declaration of their invalidity by a court
of law shall not act to suspend or invalidate the effect of this chapter.
A.
§ 237-7 WASTEWATER DISCHARGE § 237-8
232:305
§ 237-9. Escrow and security.
§ 237-10. Enforcement.
Any performance standards, design specifications, policy guidelines
or other rules and regulations promulgated under a lawfully adopted
Wetlands Protection Ordinance of the Town of Barnstable which may be
superseded by this chapter shall be considered a part of this chapter at
the time of its adoption.
B.
The Commission may require the establishment of an escrow account
or other security running to the municipality, and sufficient as to form
and surety in the opinion of the Commission's counsel, to secure faithful
and satisfactory performance of work required by any permit, in such
sum and upon such conditions as the Commission may require.
A.
Notwithstanding the above, the amount of such escrow account of
security shall not exceed the estimated cost of the work required or
the restoration of affected lands and properties if the work is not
performed as required, whichever is greater. Forfeiture of any such
escrow account or security shall be recoverable at the suit of the
municipality in Superior Court. The Commission may, at its discretion,
accept as security a conservation restriction, easement or other
covenant enforceable in a court of law, executed and duly recorded by
the owner of record, running with the land to the benefit of the Town
of Barnstable whereby the permit conditions shall be performed and
observed before any lot may be conveyed other than by mortgage deed.
B.
The Commission, its agents, officers, and employees shall have the
authority to enter upon privately owned land for the purpose of
performing their duties under this chapter. With the authority of the
property owner or his designee, the Commission may make or cause
to be made such examinations, surveys or sampling as the Commission
deems necessary.
A.
The Commission shall have the authority to enforce this chapter, its
regulations, and permits issued thereunder by violation notices,
administrative orders, and civil and criminal court actions.
B.
Upon request of the Commission, the Town Manager and Town Attorney
may take legal action for enforcement under civil law. Upon request
of the Commission, the Chief of Police may take legal action for
enforcement under criminal law.
C.
Upon request of the Commission, municipal boards and officers,
including any police officer, natural resource officer, or other officer
having police powers, shall have the authority to assist the Commission
in enforcement.
D.
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter, regulations
thereunder, or permits issued thereunder, shall be punished by a fine
E.
§ 237-8 BARNSTABLE CODE § 237-10
232:306
§ 237-11. Burden of proof.
The applicant shall have the burden of proving by a preponderance of
credible evidence that the work proposed in the application will not have
an unacceptable significant and cumulative effect upon the wetland values
protected by this chapter. Failure to provide adequate evidence to the
Commission supporting this burden shall be sufficient cause for the
Commission to deny a permit or grant a permit with conditions.
§ 237-12. Relation to the Wetlands Protection Act.
This chapter is adopted under the Home Rule Amendment of the
Massachusetts Constitution and the home rule statutes, independent of the
Wetlands Protection Act (MGL c. 131, § 40), and regulations thereunder,
except where specifically included herein.
§ 237-13. Definitions.
The following definitions apply to the interpretation of this chapter. Unless
otherwise defined here, definitions found in 310 CMR also apply to this
chapter.
AESTHETICS — Retention or improvement of natural conditions, including
natural lighting, sound, odors and significant trees, as at the time are
experienced by the general public from public ways, including waterways.
Activities in or within 100 feet of any resource area shall not have
significant effects on aesthetic values.
AGRICULTURE — Any work which produces food or other products for
commerce or subsistence which occurs in, on, or within 100 feet of a
resource area or which is directly or indirectly dependent upon wetlands
values for proper agricultural functions, such as prevention of pollution or
maintenance of adequate water flow for irrigation. Agriculture includes, but
is not limited to the growing of crops, including cranberries, and the raising
of livestock. Nonagricultural activities in or within 100 feet of resource
areas shall not have a significant effect on existing agriculture.
Notwithstanding this definition, new or expanded agricultural activities
shall not have a significant effect on other wetlands values identified in
§ 237-1 of this chapter.
ALTER — To change the condition of areas within jurisdiction of the
Conservation Commission. Activities presumed to alter these areas, include,
but are not limited to, the following:
of not more than $300. Each day or portion thereof during which
a violation continues shall constitute a separate offense, and each
provision of the chapter, regulations or permit violated shall constitute
a separate offense.
In the alternative to criminal prosecution, the Commission may elect
to utilize the noncriminal disposition procedure set forth in MGL c. 40,
§ 21D.
F.
§ 237-10 WASTEWATER DISCHARGE § 237-13
232:307
AQUACULTURE — The growing, raising, breeding, storing, or producing of
specified aquatic or marine organisms at specified locations for commercial,
municipal, or scientific purposes as approved by appropriate agencies.
Organisms in aquacultural use include, but are not limited to: shellfish, such
as oysters, quahogs, clams, lobsters, mussels, scallops and crabs; finfish,
such as trout, eel, herring, salmon, smelt and bass; amphibians, such as
frogs; reptiles, such as turtles; seaweeds, such as Irish moss and dulse;
edible freshwater plants, such as watercress; and plankton grown as a food
source for other organisms. Activities in or within 100 feet of a resource
area shall not have a significant effect on existing permitted aquaculture.
Notwithstanding this definition, new or expanded aquacultural activities
shall not have a significant effect on other wetlands values set forth in
§ 237-1 of this chapter.
COASTAL BANK — The first significant break in slope beyond the onehundred-
year storm elevation on a seaward face or elevated landform, other
than a coastal dune, which lies at the landward edge of a coastal beach,
land subject to tidal action, or other coastal wetland. The slope of the bank
must be greater than an 18% and serve to contain storm flowage, rather
than being inundated by it, or function as a sediment source. A coastal bank
may serve one of two functions:
Removal, excavation or dredging if soil, sand, gravel or aggregate
materials of any kind;
A.
Changing of preexisting drainage characteristics, flushing
characteristics, salinity distribution, sedimentation patterns, flow
patterns, or flood retention characteristics;
B.
C. Drainage or other disturbance of water level or water table;
D. Dumping, discharging, or filling with any material;
E. Placing of fill or brush or removal of material;
Erection of buildings, or structures of any kind; installation of piles
except in accordance with pier maintenance regulations of the
Commission;
F.
Destruction of plant life including the cutting of trees; application
of pesticides or herbicides except in accordance with agricultural
exemptions set forth in § 237-3;
G.
Changing water temperature, biochemical oxygen demand, or other
physical or chemical characteristics of water;
H.
Any activities, changes or work which pollute in any way any body of
water or groundwater;
I.
Any activities that change the aesthetics of a resource area in a
significant manner and for more than a temporary period.
J.
It may serve as a vertical buffer because of its height and stability
which protects upland areas from storm damage and flooding. Activities
A.
§ 237-13 BARNSTABLE CODE § 237-13
232:308
CUMULATIVE EFFECTS — Activities regulated under this chapter which
may be individually minor, but when considered in relation to other past,
present or future activities in a given area may be significant in the
aggregate.
EROSION AND SEDIMENTATION CONTROL —
FLOOD CONTROL — The ability of wetlands to absorb, store and slowly
release floodwaters to minimize peak flood levels. Flooding can be caused
by precipitation or a rising water table. Activities within 100 feet of
resource areas shall not alter the flood control value of wetlands
significantly.
GROUNDWATER — All subsurface water contained in natural geologic
formations or artificial fill, including soil water in the zone of aeration.
Activities in or within 100 feet of resource areas shall not significantly alter
the existing quality or elevation of naturally occurring groundwater.
HISTORICAL VALUES — The importance of wetlands and adjoining land
areas as sites often used for prehistoric and historic occupation,
subsistence, industry, trade, agriculture, burial and other cultural purposes.
Resource areas which are known to contain sites of historic or
archaeological resources (as by being listed of the State Register of Historic
shall not increase erosion of a coastal blank, either from above (by
stormwater runoff, brushcutting or other means) or from below (by tidal
action, wind and waves). Any project on such a coastal bank shall have
no adverse impact on the stability of the coastal bank.
Coastal banks composed of unconsolidated sediment and exposed to
vigorous wave action serve as a source of sediment for dunes, beaches,
barrier beaches and other coastal landforms. Naturally occurring wave
action removes sediment from these banks to replenish coastal
landforms. These landforms protect coastal wetlands and real property
by reducing storm damage and flooding by dissipating storm wave
energy. Any project on or within a coastal bank serving this function
shall not have a significant effect on that bank's ability to serve as a
sediment source.
B.
EROSION CONTROL — The ability of the wetland to buffer forces
or processes which would threaten or cause to be threatened the
stability of landforms and the soil and/or vegetation associated with
wetlands and adjoining land areas, in particular, coastal and inland
banks. Erosion can be caused by a wearing away of the surface soil
or by undermining the interior portion of the landform. Activities in or
within 100 feet of resource areas shall not have a significant effect on
natural erosion processes.
A.
SEDIMENTATION CONTROL — The ability of wetlands to settle out
sediments and other waterborne material by reducing water flow by
passing it through vegetation or by diffusing flow and reducing velocity.
Activities in or within 100 feet of resource areas shall not accelerate or
impede the rate of natural sedimentation significantly.
B.
§ 237-13 WASTEWATER DISCHARGE § 237-13
232:309
Places, the Inventory of Historic and Archaeological Assets of the
Commonwealth, and/or the Barnstable Historical Commission's Historic
Properties Inventory) are deemed to have historic value. Activities in or
within 100 feet of resource areas shall not have a significant effect on
historical values.
PERSON — Any individual, group of individuals, associations, partnership,
corporation, company, business organization, trust, estate, the
commonwealth or political subdivision thereof to the extent subject to
Town ordinances, administrative agency, public or quasi-public corporation
or body, the Town of Barnstable, and any other legal entity, its legal
representatives, agents, or assigns.
PRIVATE WATER SUPPLY — Any source or volume of surface or ground
water demonstrated to be in private use or shown to have potential for
private use, including ground or surface water in the zone of contribution
around a private well. Activities in or within 100 feet of a resource area shall
not have a significant effect on the quality of a private water supply.30
PUBLIC WATER SUPPLY — Any source or volume of surface or ground
water demonstrated to be in public use or approved for water supply
pursuant to MGL c. 111, § 160 by the Department of Environmental Quality
Engineering Division of Water Supply, or demonstrated to have a potential
for public use, in addition to all surface and ground water in zones of
contribution. Activities within 100 feet of resource areas shall not have a
significant effect on the quality of a public water supply.
RECREATION — Any leisure activity or sport taking place in, on, or within
100 feet of a resource area which is dependent on the resource area and
its values directly or indirectly for its conduct and enjoyment. Recreational
activities include, but are not limited to, the following: noncommercial
fishing and shellfishing, hunting, boating, swimming, walking, painting,
birdwatching and aesthetic enjoyment. Structures and activities in or within
100 feet of a resource area shall not have a significant effect on public
recreational values. Notwithstanding this definition, new or expanded
recreational activities shall not have a significant effect on other wetlands
values identified in § 237-1 of this chapter.
STORM DAMAGE PREVENTION — The ability of wetland soils, vegetation
and physiography to prevent damage caused by water from storms,
including but not limited to: erosion and sedimentation; damage to
vegetation, property or buildings; or damage caused by flooding,
waterborne debris or waterborne ice. Activities in or within 100 feet of
a resource area shall not have a significant effect on storm damage
protection.
SURFACE WATER BODY — Any area where water or ice stands or flows
over the surface of the ground for at least five months of any calendar
year except in times of severe, extended drought as defined in appropriate
section of 310 CMR. Drainage ditches, exclusive of fish runs and
30.Editor's Note: The former definition of "public trust rights," which immediately followed
this definition, was repealed 2-3-2011 by Order No. 2011-045.
§ 237-13 BARNSTABLE CODE § 237-13
232:310
intermittent streams, and impoundment areas which hold or pass water
only during or for short periods following storms and which, owing to
their relationship to groundwater, do not support wetland vegetation, are
excluded from this definition.
TRUSTLANDS — Lands impressed with public trust rights protected by the
commonwealth, including great ponds; and tidelands, being present and
former submerged lands and tidal flats lying between the natural highwater
mark and the state limit of seaward jurisdiction. Tidelands including
both flowed and filled tidelands, and privately owned and publicly owned
tidelands.
UNVEGETATED WETLAND RESOURCE AREAS — Coastal areas, such as
flats and unvegetated intertidal areas; coastal and freshwater beaches,
dunes and banks; and land subject to flooding. Also, inland areas subject to
flooding which do not support wetland vegetation, but which store at least
1/4 acre feet of water to an average depth of six inches at least once a
year, and land areas two feet or less vertically above the high-water mark
of any lake or pond defined by 310 CMR. Does not include swimming pools,
artificially lined ponds or pools, wastewater lagoons or stormwater runoff
basins, the construction of which may be regulated, but do not themselves
constitute regulated areas.
VEGETATED WETLANDS — Any area of at least 500 square feet where
surface or ground water, or ice, at or near the surface of the ground support
a plant community dominated (at least 50%) by wetland species.
WETLANDS REPLICATION — The creation of wetland, surface water body
or other resource area to compensate for the filling or other loss or
displacement of all or part of an existing wetland, surface water body or
other resource area.
WILDLIFE HABITAT — Resource areas that provide breeding and nesting
habitats, shelter, food and water to all plant and animal species dependent
on wetlands for any portion of their life cycles. Includes resource areas
identified as containing rare, threatened or endangered species as listed by
the Massachusetts Natural Heritage Program. Structures and activities in
or within 100 feet of any resource area shall not have a significant effect on
wildlife habitat.
ZONE OF CONTRIBUTION — The segment of an aquifer that contributes
significant quantities of ground or surface water to a water supply well.
§ 237-14. Severability.
The invalidity of any section or provision of this chapter shall not invalidate
any other section or provision thereof, nor shall it invalidate any permit or
determination which previously has been issued.
§ 237-13 WASTEWATER DISCHARGE § 237-14
232:311
Chapter 240
ZONING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Noncriminal disposition — See Ch. 1, Art. I.
Affordable housing — See Ch. 9.
Airport — See Ch. 13.
Building construction — See Ch. 47.
Comprehensive occupancy — See Ch. 59.
Fees — See Ch. 76.
Hazardous materials — See Chs. 108 and 381.
Historic properties — See Ch. 112.
Outdoor businesses — See Ch. 141.
Signs — See Ch. 192.
Tourist camps — 217.
Wetlands protection — See Ch. 237.
Food establishments — See Ch. 322.
On-site sewage disposal systems — See Ch.
360.
Wells — See Ch. 397.
Marinas — See Ch. 405.
Secondhand dealers and secondhand
collectors — See Ch. 508.
Subdivision Regulations — See Ch. 801.
§ 237-14 BARNSTABLE CODE § 237-14
232:312
ARTICLE I
Introduction
§ 240-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be referred to as the "Zoning
Ordinance of the Town of Barnstable, Massachusetts."
§ 240-2. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to promote the health, safety, convenience,
morals and general welfare of the inhabitants of the Town of Barnstable, to
protect and conserve the value of the property within the Town, to increase
the amenities of the Town, and to secure safety from seasonal or periodic
flooding, fire, congestion or confusion, all in accord with the General Laws,
Chapter 40A, as amended. For this purpose, the height, number of stories,
size of buildings and structures, size and width of lots, the percentage of
lot that may be occupied, the size of yards, courts and other open spaces,
the density of population and the location and use of buildings, structures
and land for trade, marine business, industry, agriculture, residence or
other purposes are regulated within the Town of Barnstable as hereinafter
provided.
§ 240-3. Interpretation.
The provisions of this chapter shall be held to be the minimum requirements
for the promotion of the purposes herein stated, and shall be interpreted
and applied in accordance with the following:
§ 240-4. Severability.
The provisions of this chapter are severable. If any court of competent
jurisdiction shall invalidate any provision herein, such invalidation shall
not affect any other provisions of this chapter. If any court of competent
jurisdiction shall invalidate the application of any provision of this chapter
to a particular case, such invalidation shall not affect the application of said
provision to any other case within the Town.
Overlapping/contradictory regulations. Except as otherwise provided
herein, this chapter shall not interfere with or annul any other
ordinance, rule, regulation or permit, provided that, unless specifically
excepted, where this chapter is more stringent, it shall control.
A.
Cumulative provisions. The provisions of this chapter shall be construed
as a continuation thereof and not as new enactments.
B.
§ 240-1 WASTEWATER DISCHARGE § 240-4
232:313

ARTICLE II
General Provisions
§ 240-5. Establishment of districts. [Amended 7-15-1999;
10-26-2000; 2-1-2001; 11-18-2004 by Order No. 2004-113;
1-20-2005 by Order No. 2005-038; 1-20-2005 by Order No.
2005-039; 7-14-2005 by Order No. 2005-100; 5-10-2007 by Order
No. 2007-101; 2-28-2008 by Order No. 2008-077; 2-28-2008 by
Order No. 2008-090; 4-3-2008 by Order No. 2008-091; 6-17-2010 by
Order No. 2010-122; 10-7-2010 by Order No. 2010-159; 9-8-2011 by
Order No. 2011-138; 2-6-2014 by Order No. 2014-050; 7-21-2016 by
Order No. 2016-166; 4-27-2017 by Order No. 2017-100]
In order to carry out the purpose of this chapter, the following districts are
hereby established:
Residential Districts
RB Residence B District
RC Residence C District
RC-1 Residence C-1 District
RC-2 Residence C-2 District
RC-2C Residence 2-C (Pond Village District)
RD Residence D District
RD-1 Residence D-1 District
RF Residence F District
RF-1 Residence F-1 District
RF-2 Residence F-2 District
RG Residence G District
RAH Residence AH District
MAH Multi-Family Affordable Housing MAH District
Office Districts
HO Highway Office District
Commercial Districts
B Business District
BA Business A District
MB-A1 Marine Business A1 District
MB-A2 Marine Business A2 District
MB-B Marine Business B District
VB-A Village Business A District
HB Highway Business District
UB Urban Business District
§ 240-5 WASTEWATER DISCHARGE § 240-5
232:315
Commercial Districts
S&D Service and Distribution District
SD-1 Service and Distribution District
MMV Marston Mills Village District
WBVBD West Barnstable Village Business District
Hyannis Village Zoning Districts
HVB Hyannis Village Business District
MS Medical Services District
SF Single Family Residential District
OM Office/Multi-Family Residential District
HD Harbor District
HG Hyannis Gateway District
TD Transportation Hub District
GM Gateway Medical District
Industrial Districts
IND LIMITED Industrial Limited District
IND Industrial District
Overlay Districts
GP Groundwater Protection Overlay District
AP Aquifer Protection Overlay District
WP Well Protection Overlay District
Shopping Center Redevelopment Overlay District
Adult Use Overlay District
RPOD Resource Protection Overlay District
DOD Dock and Pier Overlay District
Medical Services Overlay District
FG-5 Former Grade 5 School Planned Unit Development
Overlay District
SCCRC Senior Continuing Care Overlay District
Recreational Shellfish Area and Shellfish Relay Area
Dock and Pier Overlay District
Medical Marijuana Overlay District
Hyannis Parking Overlay District
§ 240-5 BARNSTABLE CODE § 240-6
232:316
§ 240-6. Zoning Map.
The Town of Barnstable is hereby divided into districts as shown on the
Official Zoning Map which, together with all explanatory matter thereon, is
hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this chapter.
§ 240-7. Application of district regulations.
Regulations within each district established herein shall be applied
uniformly to each class or kind of structure or use.
Identification of Zoning Map. The official Zoning Map shall be identified
by the title "ZONING MAP OF BARNSTABLE, MASS. DATED
September 1, 1998", which is on file in the office of the Town Clerk as
amended.
A.
Location of Zoning Map. The Official Zoning Map shall be on file with
the Town Clerk.
B.
Zoning district boundaries.
The scale of the Zoning Map and the figures entered thereon are to
serve as guides in locating the zoning district boundaries shown on
the Zoning Map.
(1)
Where a street divides two zoning districts, the districts shall be
deemed to abut each other.
(2)
Where the boundary line between zoning districts divides any lot
existing at the time such line is adopted, which has street frontage
in the less restricted area, a use authorized on the less restricted
portion of such lot may be extended into the more restricted
portion for a distance of not more than 30 feet. This subsection
shall not apply to the following districts: HO Highway Office
District; Groundwater Protection Overlay Districts; Adult Use
Overlay District; Shopping Center Redevelopment Overlay District;
MA-2 Business District; OR Office Residential District; and O-1,
O-2, O-3 Office Districts. [Amended 9-17-1998 by Order No.
99-012; 6-28-2001 by Order No. 2001-036; 7-19-2001 by Item
Nos. 2001-37, 2001-038 and 2001-039]
(3)
C.
Conformance to use regulations. No building shall be erected or altered
and no building or premises shall be used for any purpose except in
conformity with all of the regulations herein specified for the district in
which it is located.
A.
Conformance to bulk and yard regulations. No building shall be erected
or altered to exceed the height or bulk, or to have narrower or smaller
yards or other open spaces than herein required, or in any other
manner contrary to the provisions of this chapter.
B.
Lot size requirements. Wetlands shall not be included in the lot area
(square feet) requirement for zoning compliance.
C.
§ 240-6 WASTEWATER DISCHARGE § 240-7
232:317
§ 240-8. Exempt uses. [Amended 10-7-1999 by Order No. 99-160A]
Lot shape factor/residential districts. To meet the minimum area
requirements in residential districts, a lot must be a closed plot of land
having a definite area and perimeter and having a shape factor not
exceeding the numerical value of 22, except that a lot may have a shape
factor exceeding 22 if the proposed building site is located on a portion
of a lot that itself meets the minimum lot area requirement and has a
shape factor not exceeding 22, and such lots shall not be created to a
depth greater than two lots from the principal way.
D.
Contiguous upland required. In addition to the requirements of
Subsection C herein, all lots shall have 100% of the minimum required
lot area as contiguous upland.
E.
Number of buildings allowed per lot.
Residential districts: Unless otherwise specifically provided for
herein, within residential districts, only one principal permitted
building shall be located on a single lot.
(1)
All other districts: In all other districts, any number of buildings
may be located on a single lot; provided, however, that all
regulations for the district in which such buildings are located are
complied with, including percentage lot coverage if applicable.
(2)
F.
Setbacks from wetlands/great ponds. In addition to the setbacks
established hereinafter, the following shall also apply:
All construction, with the exception of elevated stairways, decks,
driveways, fences and water-dependent structures such as piers
and marina facilities, shall be set back a minimum of 35 feet from
wetlands.
(1)
All construction shall be set back a minimum of 50 feet from mean
high water on any great pond, except that in residential districts,
all buildings except boathouses shall be set back a minimum of 50
feet from mean high water on any great pond.
(2)
G.
In any residential district a one-family dwelling and its accessory
buildings may be erected on any lot which complies with the applicable
provisions of Chapter 40A of the General Laws.
H.
Gross floor area requirements. Gross floor area shall be used in all
determinations related to this chapter. [Added 10-7-1993 by Order
No. 94-016]
I.
The following uses and structures are permitted in all zoning districts:
(1) Municipal and water supply uses.
Municipal recreation use, including recreational activities
conducted on Town-owned land under the terms of a lease
(2)
A.
§ 240-7 BARNSTABLE CODE § 240-8
232:318
approved by Town Council. In the case of such a lease, any
improvements or changes to such Town-owned land shall be
subject to the review of a committee of five residents appointed by
the Town Manager or Town Council, at least two of whom shall be
from the precinct in which the land is located.
The use of land or structures exempt from the use provisions of this
chapter pursuant to MGL Ch. 40A, § 3, and any other statute.
Where such exempt uses are subject to reasonable regulation
of bulk, density and parking regulations by MGL Ch. 40A,
§ 3, reasonable regulation shall be deemed to be: the bulk
regulations of the zoning district, except that church steeples
may be permitted up to 75 feet in height; Article VI, Off-Street
Parking Regulations; and Article IX, Site Plan Review.
(a)
Where the proposed use does not comply with Subsection
A(3)(a) above, the Zoning Board of Appeals shall by a
modification permit, modify the bulk regulations of the zoning
district and/or the parking requirements of Article VI, Off-
Street Parking Regulations, where such regulation would
substantially diminish or detract from the usefulness of a
proposed development, or impair the character of the
development so as to affect its intended use, provided that
the modification of the bulk regulations and/or parking
requirements will not create a public safety hazard along the
adjacent roadways and will not create a nuisance to other,
surrounding properties such that it will impair the use of these
properties.
(b)
A modification permit shall be subject to the same procedural
requirements as a special permit, except that approval of the
modification permit shall require a majority of the members of
the Board.
(c)
(3)
Agriculture, horticulture, viticulture, aquaculture and/or
floriculture on a parcel of land five acres or less in size shall
be permitted subject to the following requirements in residential
districts:
Seasonal garden stands for the sale of seasonal fruits, flowers
and vegetables shall be permitted, only for the sale of produce
grown on the premises.
(a)
(b) No person shall be employed on the premises.
No more than one temporary, on-premises sign may be erected,
not to exceed two square feet, to be removed during the off
season.
(c)
(4)
Any structure for agricultural, horticulture, viticulture, aquaculture
and/or floriculture use shall conform to the setbacks of the zoning
B.
§ 240-8 WASTEWATER DISCHARGE § 240-8
232:319
§ 240-9. Temporary uses.
The following temporary uses are permitted in all zoning districts:
§ 240-10. Prohibited uses.
The following uses are prohibited in all zoning districts:
district, or a minimum of 25 feet, whichever is greater, except that the
keeping of horses in a residential district shall be in compliance with
the requirements of that zoning district.
Temporary occupancy of a trailer during construction of a permanent
home; provided, however, a special permit is first obtained from the
Zoning Board of Appeals.
A.
Temporary occupancy of a trailer for living purposes by nonpaying
guests for a period not exceeding 20 days in any calendar year;
provided, however, that the owner of land upon which the trailer is to
be located first obtains a permit from the Building Commissioner.
B.
Temporary occupancy of a trailer as a construction office incidental to
development of or construction on the premises on which the trailer is
to be located; provided, however, that a permit is first obtained from
the Building Commissioner.
C.
Tents. [Added 2-22-1996 by Order No. 95-194]
Maintenance and occupancy of tents in an organized and
supervised recreational camp subject to compliance with the rules
of the Barnstable Board of Health; provided, however, that a special
permit is first obtained from the Zoning Board of Appeals.
(1)
A tent may be put in place on a lot used for residential purposes, for
not more than 10 days, in connection with special family occasions
or events, but not to be used for any commercial purposes.
(2)
A tent may be put in place for not more than 10 days, not more
than twice in any calendar year, in connection with a fund-raising
or special event by a public institution or nonprofit agency.
(3)
Subject to annual approval by the Building Commissioner, a tent
may be erected and used as a temporary accessory structure to
an existing permanent business only during the period beginning
May 1 until October 31. The tent shall conform to all the parking
requirements and bulk or dimensional requirements of this chapter.
(4)
D.
Any use which is injurious, noxious or offensive by reason of the
emission of odor, fumes, dust, smoke, vibration, noise, lighting or other
cause.
A.
§ 240-8 BARNSTABLE CODE § 240-10
232:320
A tent maintained or occupied for living or business purposes, except
as permitted in § 240-9D above. [Amended 2-22-1996 by Order No.
95-194]
B.
A trailer parked, stored or occupied for living or business purposes,
except as specifically provided for in § 240-9 herein.
C.
Hotels and motels in Precincts 1, 2, 4, 6, and 7 as existing on November
9, 1983, except in the IND Limited and IND Industrial Districts.
D.
All types of non-medical "marijuana establishments" as defined in
M.G.L. c. 94G § 1, including marijuana product manufacturers,
marijuana retailers or any other types of licensed related businesses
except for licensed marijuana cultivators, research and independent
testing laboratory facilities permitted as a conditional use in the MS
Medical Services District and GM Gateway Medical District, subject
to all the requirements of Article XII, § 240-122.1 herein. [Added
9-6-2018 by Order No. 2019-015]
E.
§ 240-10 WASTEWATER DISCHARGE § 240-10
232:321

ARTICLE III
District Regulations
§ 240-11. RB, RD-1 and RF-2 Residential Districts.
Principal permitted uses. The following uses are permitted in the RB,
RD-1 and RF-2 Districts:
(1) Single-family residential dwelling (detached).
A.
Accessory uses. The following uses are permitted as accessory uses in
the RB, RD-1 and RF-2 Districts:
Renting of rooms for not more than three nonfamily members
by the family residing in a single-family dwelling. [Amended
11-7-1987 by Art. 12]
(1)
Keeping, stabling and maintenance of horses subject to the
following:
(a) Horses are not kept for economic gain.
A minimum of 21,780 square feet of lot area is provided, except
that an additional 10,890 square feet of lot area for each horse
in excess of two shall be provided.
(b)
(c) All state and local health regulations are complied with.
Adequate fencing is installed and maintained to contain the
horses within the property, except that the use of barbed wire
is prohibited.
(d)
All structures, including riding rings and fences to contain
horses, conform to 50% of the setback requirements of the
district in which located.
(e)
No temporary buildings, tents, trailers or packing crates are
used.
(f)
The area is landscaped to harmonize with the character of the
neighborhood.
(g)
(h) The land is maintained so as not to create a nuisance.
No outside artificial lighting is used beyond that normally used
in residential districts.
(i)
(2)
B.
Conditional uses. The following uses are permitted as conditional uses
in the RB, RD-1 and RF-2 Districts, provided a special permit is first
obtained from the Zoning Board of Appeals subject to the provisions of
§ 240-125C herein and the specific standards for such conditional uses
as required in this section:
C.
§ 240-11 WASTEWATER DISCHARGE § 240-11
232:323
Renting of rooms to no more than six lodgers in one multiple-unit
dwelling.
(1)
Public or private regulation golf courses subject to the following:
A minimum length of 1,000 yards is provided for a nine-hole
course and 2,000 yards for an eighteen-hole course.
(a)
No accessory buildings are located on the premises except
those for storage of golf course maintenance equipment and
materials, golf carts, a pro shop for the sale of golf related
articles, rest rooms, shower facilities and locker rooms.
(b)
(2)
Keeping, stabling and maintenance of horses in excess of the
density provisions of Subsection B(2)(b) herein, either on the same
or adjacent lot as the principal building to which such use is
accessory.
(3)
(4) (Reserved)31
Windmills and other devices for the conversion of wind energy to
electrical or mechanical energy, but only as an accessory use.
(5)
Bed-and-breakfast. [Added 2-20-1997]
Intent: It is the intent of this section to allow bed-and-breakfast
operations in larger older homes to provide an adaptive reuse
for these structures and, in so doing, encourage the
maintenance and enhancement of older buildings which are
part of the community character. This use will also create lowintensity
accommodations for tourist and visitors and enhance
the economic climate of the Town. By requiring that the
operation is owner occupied and managed, the Town seeks
to ensure that the use will be properly managed and well
maintained.
(a)
Bed-and-breakfast, subject to the following conditions:
The bed-and-breakfast operation shall be located within an
existing, owner-occupied single-family residential dwelling
constructed prior to 1970 containing a minimum of four
bedrooms as of December 1, 1996.
[1]
No more than three bedrooms shall be rented for bed-andbreakfast
to a total of six guests at any one time. For the
purpose of this section, children under the age of 12 years
shall not be considered in the total number of guests.
[2]
No cooking facilities including but not limited to stoves,
microwave ovens, toaster ovens and hot plates shall be
[3]
(b)
(6)
31.Editor's Note: Former Subsection C(4), regarding family apartments, was repealed
11-18-2004 by Order No. 2005-026. See now § 240-47.1.
§ 240-11 BARNSTABLE CODE § 240-11
232:324
available to guests, and no meals except breakfast shall be
served to guests.
The owner of the property shall be responsible for the
operation of the property and shall be resident when the
bed-and-breakfast is in operation. The owner shall file an
affidavit with the Building Commissioner on an annual
basis in the month of January stating that the property is
the principal residence of the owner and that the owner
is resident all times that the bed-and-breakfast is being
operated. If the affidavit is not filed, the operation shall
cease forthwith and any special permit issued shall be
considered null and void. The requirement for filing of an
affidavit shall not apply to bed-and-breakfast operations
legally established prior to October 1, 1996.
[4]
The single-family residence in which the bed-andbreakfast
operation is located shall be maintained so that
the appearance of the building and grounds remain that of
a single-family residence.
[5]
If the property is not served by public water, the applicant
shall provide evidence to the Zoning Board of Appeals that
the proposed use will not have any detrimental impact on
any private water supply on site or off site.
[6]
No parking shall be located in any required building yard
setback, and parking areas shall be screened from
adjoining residential properties by a fence or dense
plantings, not less than five feet in height. Parking areas
may be permitted in front of the house, not within the
required building front yard setback, provided that the
Zoning Board of Appeals finds that the spaces are
designed and located in a manner which retains the
residential character of the property. Grass overflow areas
may be utilized for parking, provided these are maintained
with a grass ground cover in good condition.
[7]
The special permit for the bed-and-breakfast conditional
use operation shall be issued to the owner only and is
not transferable to a subsequent property owner. This
provision shall only apply to bed-and-breakfast conditional
use operations established in residential districts.
[8]
Special permit uses. The following uses are permitted as special permit
uses in the RB, RD-1 and RF-2 Districts, provided a special permit is
first obtained from the Planning Board:
Open space residential developments subject to the provisions of
§ 240-17 herein.
(1)
D.
E. Bulk regulations.
§ 240-11 WASTEWATER DISCHARGE § 240-11
232:325
§ 240-12. Pond Village (Barnstable) District of Critical Planning
Concern (PVDCPC) R-2C32 [Added 5-10-2007 by Order No.
2007-101]
Minimum Yard
Setbacks
Zoning
Districts
Minimum Lot
Area
(square feet)
Minimum
Lot
Frontage
(feet)
Minimmum
Lot Width
(feet)
Front
(feet)
Side
(feet)
Rear
(feet)
Maximum
Building
Height
(feet)
RB 43,5602 20 100 203 10 10 301
RD-1 43,5602 20 125 303 10 10 301
RF-2 43,5602 20 150 303 15 15 301
NOTES:
1 Or 2 1/2 stories, whichever is lesser.
2 A minimum lot area of 87,120 square feet is required in RPOD Overlay District. [Added
10-26-2000]
3 One hundred feet along Routes 28 and 132.
Principal permitted uses. The following uses are permitted in the R-2C
District:
(1) Single-family residential dwelling (detached).
A.
Accessory uses. The following uses are permitted as accessory uses in
the R-2C District:
(1) Family apartments. (See § 240-47.1.)
Keeping, stabling and maintenance of horses subject to the
provisions of § 240-11B(2).
(2)
(3) Home occupation. (See § 240-46).
Renting of rooms to not more than three nonfamily members by the
family residing in a single-family residence.
(4)
(5)
B.
Special permit uses. The following uses are permitted as special permit
uses in the R-2C District, provided that a special permit is first obtained
from the Board.
Keeping, stabling and maintenance of horses in excess of the
density provisions of § 240-11B(2)(b) herein, either on the same
(1)
C.
32.Editor's Note: Former § 240-12, RB-1 Residential District, as amended, was repealed
7-14-2005 by Order No. 2005-100.
§ 240-11 BARNSTABLE CODE § 240-12
232:326
§ 240-13. RC, RD, RF-1 and RG Residential Districts.
lot or adjacent lot as the principal building to which such use is
accessory.
Windmills and other devices for the conversion of wind energy to
electrical or mechanical energy but only as an accessory use. (See
§ 240-44.1.)
(2)
Open space residential developments. (See § 240-17.)
Bulk regulations:
(a) Minimum lot area, contiguous upland: 87,120 square feet.
(b) Minimum lot frontage: 20 feet.
(c) Minimum front yard setback: 30 feet.
(d) Minimum side and rear yard setback: 15 feet.
Maximum building height:
[1] Maximum building height in feet: 30.
[2] Maximum building height in stories: 2 1/2.
(e)
(1)
Grandfathering. Within the R-2C District, any lot that met the
minimum lot area and minimum lot frontage requirements of the
RF-1 or RF-2 Districts respectively, prior to the effective date of the
Pond Village DCPC nomination of August 26, 2005, as specified in
the Cape Cod Commission Acceptance Decision dated September
15, 2005, shall not be subject to R-2C minimum lot area.
(2)
D.
Principal permitted uses. The following uses are permitted in the RC,
RD, RF-1 and RG Districts:
(1) Single-family residential dwelling (detached).
A.
Accessory uses. The following uses are permitted as accessory uses in
the RC, RD, RF-1 and RG Districts:
Keeping, stabling and maintenance of horses subject to the
provisions of § 240-11B(2) herein.
(1)
B.
Conditional uses. The following uses are permitted as conditional uses
in the RC, RD, RF-1 and RG Districts, provided a special permit is first
obtained from the Zoning Board of Appeals subject to the provisions
of § 240-125C herein and subject to the specific standards for such
conditional uses as required in this section:
Public or private regulation golf courses subject to the provisions
of § 240-11C(2) herein.
(1)
C.
§ 240-12 WASTEWATER DISCHARGE § 240-13
232:327
§ 240-14. RC-1 and RF Residential Districts.
Keeping, stabling and maintenance of horses in excess of the
density provisions of § 240-11B(2)(b) herein, either on the same
or adjacent lot as the principal building to which such use is
accessory.
(2)
(3) (Reserved)33
Windmills and other devices for the conversion of wind energy to
electrical or mechanical energy, but only as an accessory use.
(4)
Special permit uses. The following uses are permitted as special permit
uses in the RC, RD, RF-1 and RG Districts, provided a special permit is
first obtained from the Planning Board:
Open space residential developments subject to the provisions of
§ 240-17 herein.
(1)
D.
Bulk regulations.
Minimum Yard Setbacks
Zoning
Districts
Minimum
Lot Area
(square
feet)
Minimum
Lot
Frontage
(feet)
Minimum Lot
Width
(feet)
Front
(feet)
Side
(feet)
Rear
(feet)
Maximum
Building
Height
(feet)
RC 43,5602 20 100 203 10 10 301
RD 43,5602 20 125 303 15 15 301
RF-1 43,5602 20 125 303 15 15 301
RG 65,000 20 200 303 15 15 301
NOTES:
1 Or 2 1/2 stories, whichever is lesser.
2 A minimum lot area of 87,120 square feet is required in RPOD Overlay District. [Added
10-26-2000]
3 One hundred feet along Routes 28 and 132.
E.
Principal permitted uses. The following uses are permitted in the RC-1
and RF Districts:
(1) Single-family residential dwelling (detached).
A.
Accessory uses. The following uses are permitted as accessory uses in
the RC-1 and RF Districts:
B.
33.Editor's Note: Former Subsection C(4), regarding family apartments, was repealed
11-18-2004 by Order No. 2005-026. See now § 240-47.1.
§ 240-13 BARNSTABLE CODE § 240-14
232:328
Renting of rooms for not more than three nonfamily members
by the family residing in a single-family dwelling. [Amended
11-7-1987 by Art. 12]
(1)
Keeping, stabling and maintenance of horses subject to the
provisions of § 240-11B(2) herein.
(2)
Conditional uses. The following uses are permitted as conditional uses
in the RC-1 and RF Districts, provided a special permit is first obtained
from the Zoning Board of Appeals subject to the provisions of
§ 240-125C herein and subject to the specific standards for such
conditional uses as required in this section: [Amended 8-17-1995 by
Order No. 95-195]
Home occupation, subject to all the provisions of § 240-46C, Home
occupation by special permit.
(1)
Renting of rooms to no more than six lodgers in one multiple-unit
dwelling.
(2)
Public or private regulation golf courses subject to the provisions
of § 240-11C(2) herein.
(3)
Keeping, stabling and maintenance of horses in excess of the
density provisions of § 240-11B(2)(b) herein, either on the same
or adjacent lot as the principal building to which such use is
accessory.
(4)
(5) (Reserved)34
Windmills and other devices for the conversion of wind energy to
electrical or mechanical energy, but only as an accessory use.
(6)
Bed-and-breakfast operation subject to the provisions of
§ 240-11C(6). [Added 2-20-1997]
(7)
C.
Special permit uses. The following uses are permitted as special permit
uses in the RC-1 and RF Districts, provided a special permit is first
obtained from the Planning Board:
Open space residential developments subject to the provisions of
§ 240-17 herein.
(1)
Private initiated affordable housing developments: A privateinitiated
affordable housing developments (PI-AHD) on seven acres
or more, subject to the provisions of § 240-17.1 and in full
compliance with the standards set forth therein. Added
11-18-2004 by Order No. 2004-113]
(2)
D.
E. Bulk regulations.
34.Editor's Note: Former Subsection C(4), regarding family apartments, was
repealed11-18-2004 by Order No. 2005-026. See now § 240-47.1.
§ 240-14 WASTEWATER DISCHARGE § 240-14
232:329
§ 240-15. RC-2 Residential District.
Minimum Yard
Setbacks
(feet)
Zoning
Districts
Minimum Lot
Area
(square feet)
Minimum
Lot
Frontage
(feet)
Minimum Lot
Width
(feet) Front Side Rear
Maximum
Building
Height
(feet)
RC-1 43,5602 125 — 303 15 15 301
RF 43,5602 150 — 303 15 15 301
1Or 2 1/2 stories, whichever is lesser.
2A minimum lot area of 87,120 square feet is required in RPOD Overlay District. [Added
10-26-2000]
3One hundred feet along Routes 28 and 132.
Principal permitted uses. The following uses are permitted in the RC-2
District:
(1) Single-family residential dwelling (detached).
A.
Accessory uses. The following uses are permitted as accessory uses in
the RC-2 District:
Keeping, stabling and maintenance of horses subject to the
provisions of § 240-11B(2) herein.
(1)
B.
Conditional uses. The following uses are permitted as conditional uses
in the RC-2 District, provided a special permit is first obtained from
the Zoning Board of Appeals subject to the provisions of § 240-125C
herein and subject to the specific standards for such conditional uses
as required in this section:
Nursing and/or retirement home, but not to include hospitals,
sanatoriums, convalescent homes or detached infirmaries or
clinics, subject to the following:
(a) The site for the home consists of a minimum of five acres.
The capacity-to-land ratio of the home does not exceed 10 beds
per acre.
(b)
Off-street parking is provided in compliance with Article VI
herein.
(c)
All buildings are located a minimum of 150 feet from existing
public ways.
(d)
(1)
C.
§ 240-14 BARNSTABLE CODE § 240-15
232:330
The applicant has received a certificate of need from the
Massachusetts Division of Medical Care, Department of Public
Health.
(e)
A perimeter survey has been submitted showing entire tract
ownership, all abutting ownership and all existing ways and
easements.
(f)
A topographic plan of the entire site has been submitted by
a registered land surveyor showing elevation contours at fivefoot
intervals and showing all existing structures and
vegetative cover masses, such plan to have been compiled
by means of on-site survey or approved aerial photographic
method.
(g)
A sketch plan of the proposed development has been submitted
showing the density and location of structures, vehicular and
pedestrian circulation, roadways and parking, proposed
utilities and pertinent vegetation and soil and water conditions.
(h)
An architectural rendering or sketch has been submitted of any
proposed structure.
(i)
Public or private regulation golf courses subject to the provisions
of § 240-11C(2) herein.
(2)
Keeping, stabling and maintenance of horses in excess of the
density provisions of § 240-11B(2)(b) herein, either on the same
or adjacent lot as the principal building to which such use is
accessory.
(3)
(4) (Reserved)35
Windmills and other devices for the conversion of wind energy to
electrical or mechanical energy, but only as an accessory use.
(5)
Special permit uses. The following uses are permitted as special permit
uses in the RC-2 District, provided a special permit is first obtained
from the Planning Board:
Open space residential developments subject to the provisions of
§ 240-17 herein.
(1)
D.
E. Bulk regulations.
35.Editor's Note: Former Subsection C(4), regarding family apartments, was
repealed11-18-2004 by Order No. 2005-026. See now § 240-47.1.
§ 240-15 WASTEWATER DISCHARGE § 240-15
232:331
§ 240-16. RAH Residential District. [Added 11-5-1988 by Art. 9]
Minimum Yard
Setbacks
(feet)
Zoning
Districts
Minimum Lot
Area
(square feet)
Minimum
Lot
Frontage
(feet)
Minimum
Lot Width
(feet) Front Side Rear
Maximum
Building
Height
(feet)
RC-2 43,5602 20 100 203 10 10 301
1Or 2 1/2 stories, whichever is lesser.
2A minimum lot area of 87,120 square feet is required in RPOD Overlay District.
3One hundred feet along Routes 28 and 132. [Added 10-26-2000]
Principal permitted uses. The following uses are permitted in the RAH
District:
(1) Single-family residential dwelling (detached).
Affordable single-family residential dwellings subject to the special
bulk regulation contained herein. For the purpose of this section
the term "affordable" shall mean dwellings sold or leased by a
nonprofit corporation and/or governmental agency whose principal
purpose is to provide housing to eligible tenants and/or buyers.
(2)
A.
Conditional uses. The following uses are permitted as conditional uses
in the RAH District, provided a special permit is first obtained from
the Zoning Board of Appeals subject to the provisions of § 240-125C
herein and subject to the specific standards for such conditional uses
as required in this section:
(1) (Reserved)36
Windmills and other devices for the conversion of wind energy to
electrical or mechanical energy, but only as an accessory use.
(2)
B.
Special permit uses. The following uses are permitted as special permit
uses in the RAH District, provided a special permit is first obtained from
the Planning Board:
Open space residential developments subject to the provisions of
§ 240-17 herein.
(1)
C.
D. Bulk regulations.
36.Editor's Note: Former Subsection C(4), regarding family apartments, was
repealed11-18-2004 by Order No. 2005-026. See now § 240-47.1.
§ 240-15 BARNSTABLE CODE § 240-16
232:332
§ 240-16.1. MAH Residential District. [Added 2-28-2008 by Order
No. 2008-077; amended 1-20-2011 by Order No. 2011-039]
Minimum Yard
Setbacks
(feet)
Zoning
Districts
Minimum Lot
Area
(square feet)
Minimum
Lot
Frontage
(feet)
Minimum
Lot Width
(feet) Front Side Rear
Maximum
Building
Height
(feet)
RAH 43,560 125 — 30 15 15 301
RAH 10,0002,3 20 75 30 15 15 301
1Or 2 1/2 stories, whichever is lesser.
2Provided that each dwelling is connected to the municipal sewage collection system when the
site is located in a Groundwater Protection Overlay District.
3As an alternative to individual lots, more than one single-family dwelling may be constructed on
a lot, provided that the area of any such lot shall contain not less than 10,000 square feet of
contiguous upland for each single-family dwelling constructed. When more that one singlefamily
dwelling is constructed on a lot said dwelling shall be at least 30 feet apart.
Purpose. The purpose of this section is to authorize by special permit
privately initiated affordable housing by for-profit or not-for-profit
organizations that:
Provide for residential development in a manner that is consistent
with existing neighborhood development in terms of density and
housing types; and
(1)
Authorize an increase in the permissible density of housing in
a proposed development, provided that the applicant shall, as a
condition for the grant of said special permit, provide housing for
persons of low or moderate income.
(2)
A.
Principal permitted uses. The following uses are permitted in the MAH
District:
(1) Single-family residential dwelling (detached).
B.
Special permit uses. For the purposes of this section, the Planning
Board shall be the special permit granting authority. The following uses
are permitted as conditional uses in the MAH District, provided that a
special permit is first obtained from the Planning Board subject to the
provisions of § 240-125C herein and subject to the specific standards
for such special permit uses as required in this section:
Multifamily affordable housing developments connected to the
municipal sewage collection system.
(1)
C.
§ 240-16 WASTEWATER DISCHARGE § 240-16.1
232:333
Bulk regulations. [Amended 11-2-2017 by Order No. 2018-027]
Minimum Yard
Setbacks
Zoning (feet)
District
Minimum
Lot Area
(square
feet)
Minimum
Lot
Frontage
(feet)
Minimum
Lot
Width
(feet) Front Side Rear
Maximum
Building
Height1
(feet)
MAH 87,120 200 — 60 30 30 30
NOTES:
1 Height shall be measured from the grade plane to the plate.
D.
Density requirements. The total number of residential units allowable
within a Multifamily Affordable Housing Development (MAHD) shall not
exceed 16 per acre of upland. [Amended 11-2-2017 by Ord. No.
2018-027]
E.
Affordable units. At least 25% of the dwelling units shall be affordable
units, subject to the following conditions:
All affordable units shall remain affordable, as defined herein, in
perpetuity. A use restriction shall assure this condition. The use
restriction shall be structured to survive any and all foreclosures.
(1)
The continuing enforcement of the use restriction through
subsequent resale of the affordable units shall be the subject of a
monitoring agreement.
(2)
The use restriction and the monitoring agreement shall be drafted
in compliance with the Local Initiative Program (LIP), and
guidelines promulgated thereunder. The use restriction and the
monitoring agreement shall be subject to review and approval by
the Planning Board and approved as to form by the Town Attorney's
office prior to the issuance of any building permits for any dwelling
unit.
(3)
The affordable unit shall conform to all Department of Housing and
Community Development (DHCD) standards that must be met to
qualify these units for inclusion in the DHCD Subsidized Housing
Inventory (SHI).
(4)
A right of first refusal upon the transfer of such affordable units
shall be granted to the Town or its designee for a period of not less
than 120 days after notice thereof.
(5)
Affordable units shall not be segregated within the MAHD. The
affordable units shall satisfy the design and construction standards
and guidelines of the Local Initiative Program with regard to
distinguishability from market rate units. It is the intent of this
section that the affordable units shall be eligible for inclusion in
(6)
F.
§ 240-16.1 BARNSTABLE CODE § 240-16.1
232:334
the DHCD Subsidized Housing Inventory as LIP units. [Amended
11-2-2017 by Order No. 2018-02737]
Affordable units shall obtain occupancy permits issued at the rate
of one affordable unit for every four market rate units. [Amended
11-2-2017 by Order No. 2018-027]
(7)
In computing the number of required affordable units, any fraction
of a unit shall be rounded up, and the result of this computation
shall be the number of affordable units required to be built within
the MAHD. Affordable units shall only be located within any
development permitted under this provision. This standard is not
subject to variance.
(8)
No occupancy permit shall be granted unless the affordable
dwelling units have been approved by the DHCD as eligible for
the DHCD Subsidized Housing Inventory under the Local Initiative
Program (LIP) Guidelines. [Amended 11-2-2017 by Order No.
2018-02738]
(9)
Decision. The Planning Board may grant a special permit for a MAHD
where it makes the following findings:
The proposed MAHD complies with all applicable subdivision rules
unless otherwise waived by the Board.
(1)
The proposed MAHD complies with the Zoning Ordinance and the
requirements of this section.
(2)
The proposed MAHD provides affordable units consistent with the
requirements set forth herein.
(3)
The proposed MAHD does not cause substantial detriment to the
neighborhood.
(4)
G.
Relation to other requirements. The submittals and special permit
required herein shall be in addition to any other requirements of the
Subdivision Control Law or any other provisions of this Zoning
Ordinance.
H.
Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
AFFORDABLE UNIT — A dwelling unit reserved in perpetuity for rental
or ownership by a qualified affordable housing unit purchaser or tenant
I.
37.Editor’s Note: This order also repealed former Subsection F(7), which immediately
followed and set forth regulations for inclusionary requirements for applicants under §
240-29 of the Senior Continuing Care Retirement Community Overlay District. The order
also renumbered former Subsection F(8) through (10) as Subsection F(7) through (9),
respectively.
38.Editor’s Note: This order also repealed former Subsection F(11), which immediately
followed and set forth regulations for a multifamily affordable housing development
proposed to satisfy inclusionary requirements for a senior continuing care retirement
community.
§ 240-16.1 WASTEWATER DISCHARGE § 240-16.1
232:335
§ 240-17. Open space residential development. [Amended
11-7-1987 by Art. 4; 6-17-1999]
as defined under § 9.2 of the Code, and priced to conform with the
standards of the Massachusetts Department of Housing and
Community Development (DHCD) for ownership units set forth in the
Local Initiative Program Guidelines, in order that such affordable units
shall be included in the DHCD Subsidized Housing Inventory.
APPLICANT — The person or persons, including a corporation or other
legal entity, who applies for issuance of a special permit for
construction of a private-initiated affordable housing development
(MAHD) hereunder. The applicant must own or be the beneficial owner
of all the land included in the proposed MAHD, or have authority from
the owner(s) to act for the owner(s) or hold an option or contract duly
executed by the owner(s) and the applicant giving the latter the right
to acquire the land to be included in the site.
MULTIFAMILY AFFORDABLE HOUSING DEVELOPMENT (MAHD) — A
development of multifamily residential dwelling(s), including required
affordable units and permissible accessory structures, authorized by
special permit from the Planning Board as set forth herein.39
USE RESTRICTION — A restriction ensuring the continued affordability
of a dwelling unit. A use restriction is a deed restriction or other legally
binding instrument in a form consistent with Department of Housing
and Community Development (DHCD) Local Initiative Program (LIP)
guidelines which runs with the land and is recorded with the relevant
registry of deeds or land court registry district, and which effectively
restricts the occupancy of a low- or moderate-income housing unit
to income eligible households during the term of affordability. A use
restriction shall contain terms and conditions for the resale of a
homeownership unit, including definition of the maximum permissible
resale price, and for the subsequent rental of a rental unit, including
definition of the maximum permissible rent. A use restriction shall
require that tenants of rental units and owners of homeownership units
shall occupy the units as their principal residences.
Purpose. This section has been established to permit a variation in
development styles with efficient provision of roads and utilities; and
to provide for the public interest by the preservation of open space in
perpetuity, for protection of both natural resources and visual character
of the land.
A.
Application. An open space residential development is permitted in all
residential districts by special permit from the Planning Board.
B.
39.Editor’s Note: The definition of “nursing or convalescent home,” which immediately
followed, was repealed 11-2-2017 by Order No. 2018-027.
§ 240-16.1 BARNSTABLE CODE § 240-17
232:336
Minimum area. A minimum area shall be required sufficient to
accommodate no less than four dwelling units based on all the
requirements of the zoning district in which the development is located.
C.
Permitted uses. The following uses are permitted in an open space
residential development:
Detached single-family dwellings and permitted accessory uses,
including a cluster unit wastewater treatment facility.
(1)
(2) Common open space, preserved as such in perpetuity.
Recreational facilities and activities exclusively for use by residents
of an open space residential development, as approved by the
Planning Board.
(3)
D.
Density requirements. The total number of residential units allowable
within an open space residential development shall not exceed the
number of units that would be allowed in the zoning district in which
the site is located. The total number of units allowed shall be
determined by submission of a preliminary grid sketch plan in
accordance with Subsection M(1) herein, showing the total number of
developable lots which could be obtained by utilizing a conventional
grid subdivision, in conformance with all the zoning district area
requirements, and with legal access over the road providing frontage.
Lots on the preliminary plan which are not practically buildable
because of impediments to development, such as slope in excess of
15%, utility easements, impervious soils, high groundwater or the
location of wetlands, shall not be countable towards the number of
developable lots, except that this provision may be waived for a
development which is 100% affordable. For the purposes of this section,
"affordable" shall mean dwellings sold or leased by a nonprofit
corporation and/or government agency whose principal purpose is to
provide housing to eligible tenants and/or buyers. Such housing shall
remain affordable in perpetuity.
E.
Bulk regulations. The Planning Board may grant a reduction of the
bulk regulations, provided that in no instance shall any lot contain less
15,000 square feet or have less than 20 feet of frontage, a front yard
setback of not less than 20 feet, and side and rear setbacks of not less
than 12 feet. The minimum lot size may be further decreased by the
Planning Board for a development which is 100% affordable, as defined
in Subsection C above. No lot shall be panhandled more than two lots
from a roadway, and panhandled lots shall only be permitted where the
Planning Board finds that safe and adequate access is provided to the
rear lot. As a condition of approval of the special permit, the developer
shall submit evidence to the Planning Board of recorded easements,
to assure access to joint driveways, where shown on the definitive
subdivision plan.
F.
Soils. The nature of the soils and subsoils shall be suitable for the
construction of roads and buildings. The Planning Board may require
G.
§ 240-17 WASTEWATER DISCHARGE § 240-17
232:337
that soil borings or test pits be made on each lot as shown on the
preliminary sketch plan, when borings required pursuant to the
Subdivision Rules and Regulations,40 or the USDA, Soil Conservation
Service maps indicate soils which may not be suitable for development.
Soil borings if required, shall indicate soil texture, percolation rates and
depth to the ground water table at its maximum elevation, in order to
determine the buildability of each lot. Maximum groundwater elevation
shall be determined using data available from the US Geological Survey
publication "Probable High Ground Water Levels on Cape Cod."
Wastewater.
The development shall be connected to Town sewer, or shall comply
with the provisions of 310 CMR 15.00, of the State Environmental
Code (Title 5) and the on-site wastewater disposal regulations of
the Board of Health.41 No on-site sewage disposal leaching field
systems shall be located within 150 feet from any wetland or
surface water body, and where possible, located outside a
riverfront area as defined according to 310 CMR 10.58, Riverfront
Area. In no instance shall an open space residential development
be approved which requires a variance to be granted from Title
5 of the State Environmental Code, or on-site sewage disposal
regulations of the Board of Health with regard to depth to
groundwater, distance to wetlands, buildings or public or private
water supply wells. Such Board of Health variance shall render the
special permit void as it pertains to the lot or lots affected.
(1)
Based only upon recommendation by the Board of Health pursuant
to MGL Ch. 41, § 81U, that lots in the development be connected
to a clustered unit wastewater system, with or without nutrient
removal, the Planning Board shall incorporate such requirement
into a decision of approval, as a condition of that approval.
(2)
The clustered unit wastewater system shall be located as far as
possible from any sensitive environmental receptor, such as public
or private wells, wetlands or water bodies, vernal pools, and rare
and endangered species habitats.
(3)
A clustered unit wastewater system location, design, maintenance,
repair and operation is specifically subject to approval by the Board
of Health as a condition of approval of the open space residential
development.
(4)
Where the common open space is to be owned by the homeowners,
a clustered unit wastewater system shall be located on a common
open space lot, shown on the definitive plan and labeled as such.
Where the common open space is to be deeded to the Town or to
a nonprofit corporation pursuant to Subsection M(2)(b) below, a
(5)
H.
40.Editor's Note: See Ch. 801, Subdivision Rules and Regulations.
41.Editor's Note: See 360, On-Site Sewage Disposal Systems.
§ 240-17 BARNSTABLE CODE § 240-17
232:338
clustered unit wastewater system shall be located upon a separate
lot and owned by a corporation or trust, owned or to be owned,
by the owners of lots or residential units within the development.
Undivided interest in the wastewater treatment facility and the
lot on which it is located shall pass with the conveyance of each
building lot, or unit. The trust or corporation documents ensuring
common ownership and management of the facility by the
homeowners shall be submitted to the Planning Board with the
definitive subdivision plan; and submitted to the Board of Health at
the time of application of the definitive plan to the Planning Board.
The homeowners corporation or trust shall be responsible for the
operation, maintenance, repair and eventual replacement of the
wastewater treatment facility, in accordance with all federal, state,
Cape Cod Commission and Board of Health requirements, as a
condition of approval of the open space residential development
special permit.
(6)
Water supply.
Public water supply shall ordinarily be required in open space
residential developments, unless the applicant demonstrates that it
cannot reasonably be made available to the site.
(1)
In areas dependent upon private wells, a special permit for an
open space residential development shall only be granted upon
recommendation from the Board of Health, pursuant to MGL Ch.
41, § 81U, with the finding that contamination of private wells both
on site and off site, will not occur, either because the development
has been designed with sufficient distance between private wells,
septic systems and drainage facilities, or because the applicant
is providing an appropriately located clustered unit wastewater
system.
(2)
No variance shall be granted from Board of Health, well and onsite
sewage disposal regulations, to waive the minimum separation
distance between a public or private well and septic system, either
on site or off site.
(3)
I.
Floodplains.
No developable lots or roads shall be located on barrier beaches
and coastal dunes as defined by the Wetlands Policy Act, or within
the FEMA V Zones.
(1)
Filling, dredging and placement of utilities or structures within
the one-hundred-year floodplain, as shown on the current National
Flood Insurance Rate Maps, shall be avoided and development
concentrated outside the A and B Flood Zones to the maximum
extent feasible. If site conditions are such that compliance with this
subsection would be impracticable, such activities may be allowed
in conformity with § 240-34 herein.
(2)
J.
§ 240-17 WASTEWATER DISCHARGE § 240-17
232:339
Preservation of site topographic features. The subdivision design shall
preserve and enhance the natural topography of the land by locating
roads and building sites in relationship to the existing topography so as
to minimize the amount of land clearance, grading, and cuts and fills.
K.
Open space use, design and maintenance standards. Within an open
space residential development, the balance of the area requirement for
lot size shall be provided in common open space, designated as an open
space lot or lots on the subdivision plan. The common open space shall
be used, designed, and maintained in accordance with the following
standards:
As a condition of approval of the special permit, open space shall
be retained as such, in perpetuity, and not built upon or developed,
except as permitted by the Planning Board pursuant to Subsection
L(5) below.
(1)
A minimum of 50% of the total upland area of the development
shall be devoted to common open space, except that 60% shall be
required where the minimum lot size of the zoning district exceeds
one acre. Land set aside for roads, appurtenant drainage systems,
and/or parking uses shall not be included in the percentage
calculation of open space. The lot, or portion of an open space lot
containing a clustered unit wastewater system, may be included in
the open space minimum percentage requirement.
(2)
Open space land shall be designed as a large contiguous lot or lots.
Strips or narrow parcels of common open space shall be permitted
only when necessary for access or for walking trails, including
linkages to adjacent trails. Open space shall be located so as to
provide maximum protection to the environmental resources of the
site and of adjacent lands. Priority natural resources areas are as
follows and shall include but not be limited to the following areas:
WP and GP Groundwater Protection Overlay Districts, as
shown on the most current Groundwater Protection Overlay
District Map, adopted as part of this chapter;
(a)
Three-hundred-foot buffer zones to freshwater bodies and
vernal pools; and two-hundred-foot riverfront buffer areas and
vernal pools as defined according to 310 CMR 10.58;
(b)
Critical and significant habitats as determined from the
following sources: Cape Cod Critical Habitats Atlas, APCC,
1990; Cape Cod Wildlife Conservation Project, significant
habitat maps, prepared by the Compact of Cape Cod
Conservation Trusts Inc.; and any other town or county
significant resource habitat maps;
(c)
FEMA V, A and B Flood Zones as shown on the current National
flood Insurance Rate Maps;
(d)
(3)
L.
§ 240-17 BARNSTABLE CODE § 240-17
232:340
(e) Wetland and coastal habitats;
(f) Private supply wells;
Adjacent open space; and historic structures and archeological
sites.
(g)
Open space may also be used to provide a buffer from roadways, to
protect steep slopes from development activities, and to preserve a
scenic corridor along roadways. The Planning Board in approving
an open space residential development shall take into
consideration any report from the Planning Department,
Conservation Department or Conservation Commission relative to
the location and design of the open space lot or lots.
(4)
Common open space shall be maintained in an open and natural
condition, without clearing, predominantly in its present condition,
for the protection of natural habitats, except as permitted by the
Planning Board as follows:
Where the open space is to be owned by corporation or trust
of homeowners, a maximum of 10% of the common open space
may be developed for common recreational facilities. The
location and type of recreational facilities shall be shown on
the definitive open space subdivision plan. A minimum setback
of 50 feet shall be provided between any common open space
structure and adjacent lots.
(a)
Naturally existing woods, fields, meadows and wetlands should
be maintained and improved in accordance with good
conservation practices. The Planning Board shall require
submission of a maintenance plan where improvements to, or
on-going maintenance, would enhance the open space lot or
lots.
(b)
Subject to approval of a management plan by the Planning
Board, the following may be permitted: farming, agriculture,
horticulture, silviculture, and the harvesting of crops, flowers
and hay.
(c)
The construction and maintenance of fences around the
perimeter of the open space.
(d)
The creation of unpaved walking paths, horseback riding trails
or jogging paths for recreational use.
(e)
The Planning Board may permit utility tie ins across open
space, by an easement shown on the subdivision plan. Clearing
should be no more than 10 feet in width, and the land promptly
restored after installation. The Engineering Division of DPW
shall be notified prior to the commencement of any clearance
for utilities across open space.
(f)
(5)
§ 240-17 WASTEWATER DISCHARGE § 240-17
232:341
In cases where the open space has been environmentally damaged
prior to the completion of the development as a result of land
clearance, grading, soil removal, excavation, harvesting of trees,
refuse disposal, structures, or any other activity deemed
inappropriate with the proposed uses of the common open space,
the Planning Board may require the developer to restore or
improve the condition and appearance of the common open space,
and may require the posting of security, in a form and amount to
be determined by the Planning Board, to ensure such restoration
or improvement.
(6)
Common open space ownership and management.
The applicant for approval of an open space residential
development special permit shall demonstrate to the Planning
Board ownership and control of the open space. The Planning
Board may require title insurance to the open space.
(1)
Upon approval by the Planning Board of the development concept,
and subject to acceptance by the Town Council, the common open
space shall be conveyed to and owned by one or more of the
following entities:
A nonprofit corporation, the principle purpose of which is the
preservation of open space.
(a)
A corporation or trust, owned or to be owned, by the owners
of lots or residential units within the development. Undivided
interest in the open space lot or lots shall pass with the
conveyance of each building lot or unit.
(b)
The Town for conservation purposes, or for a park in areas
suitable for such purpose. No open space lot or lots shall be
deeded to the Town without acceptance of the land by the Town
Council and/or Town Manager, taking into consideration an
advisory opinion of the Planning Board, Planning Department,
Conservation Commission and/or Conservation Department,
local or regional historic district and Historic Commission.
(c)
(2)
In those cases where the common open space is not conveyed
to the Town, a restriction enforceable by the Town by Form 1A42
shall be recorded, provided that such land shall be kept in open
and in a natural state and not built upon for residential use or
developed for accessory uses such as parking or roadways. The
applicant shall provide an agreement empowering the Town to
perform maintenance of the common open space in the event of
failure to comply with the maintenance program, provided that, if
the Town is required to perform any maintenance work, the owners
of lots or units within the open space residential development shall
(3)
M.
42.Editor's Note: Form 1A can be found at the end of Chapter 801, Subdivision Rules and
Regulations.
§ 240-17 BARNSTABLE CODE § 240-17
232:342
pay the cost thereof and that the cost shall constitute a lien upon
their properties until said cost has been paid. Form 1A shall be fully
executed and recorded with the development permits and approved
subdivision plan.
In addition to the common open space required herein, the
Planning Board may require that a developable lot or lots shall
be set aside for the purpose of creating additional open space or
recreational areas, pursuant to MGL Ch. 41, § 81U, for a period of
not more than three years, during which time no clearing of the
land or building shall be erected without approval of the Planning
Board. Any such condition of approval shall be endorsed upon the
definitive subdivision open space residential development plan.
(4)
Review procedures.
Prior to any application for an open space residential development,
no land clearance, grading, cuts, fills, excavation, ditching, or
utility installations shall occur, except for purposes of soil testing
in accordance with all the requirements of the Subdivision Rules
and Regulations,43 on any part of the development site prior to
development application submission and approval as provided for
herein. Commencement of land clearance or grading of the land
for the construction of access or development of lots prior to
application may be grounds for denial of the special permit by the
Planning Board.
(1)
An application for an open space residential development special
permit shall be submitted in conformity with the requirements and
procedures for submission and review under the Subdivision Rules
and Regulations of the Planning Board, and the following additional
requirements in Subsection O below.
(2)
N.
Preliminary plan requirements.
Applicants shall submit a preliminary plan to the Planning Board
and the Board of Health prior to filing a formal special permit
application, in order to obtain a consensus regarding the suitability
of the open space residential development general design
concepts, and to determine allowable density prior to submission
of special permit application and definitive subdivision plan. In
addition to the materials required for submission of a preliminary
plan under the Subdivision Rules and Regulations, the preliminary
materials shall include the following:
Nine copies of a preliminary grid sketch plan, to demonstrate
the number of buildable lots that can be obtained in
conformance with the area requirements of the zoning district,
and all the requirements of the Subdivision Rules and
(a)
(1)
O.
43.Editor's Note: See Ch. 801, Subdivision Rules and Regulations.
§ 240-17 WASTEWATER DISCHARGE § 240-17
232:343
Regulations. Topographic information may be obtained from
Information Technology, GIS unit.
Two copies of the following maps for the development site as
follows:
USDA Natural Resources soil survey, maps and soil
descriptions regarding the nature of the soils within the
proposed development. The location of all test pit and soil
logs shall be shown on the topographic plan, and soil log
descriptions submitted to both the Planning Board and
Engineering Division of DPW.
[1]
Cape Cod Critical Habitats Atlas, APCC, 1990; Cape Cod
Wildlife Conservation Project, significant habitat maps,
prepared by the Compact of Cape Cod Conservation Trusts
Inc.; and any other Town or county resource habitat maps;
when these documents indicate critical or significant
habitats on, or adjacent to the site.
[2]
(b)
Nine copies of the proposed preliminary open space residential
development plan showing the location and dimensions of all
building lots, the location of open space lot or lots, the location
and use of any common facilities or structures, including any
proposed clustered unit wastewater system, and/or
recreational facilities, the location of all ways and easements,
private water supply wells within the site, and public and
private water supply wells on adjacent properties, and such
other improvements as may be proposed.
(c)
A description of the proposed uses of the common open space
and the preferred form of ownership and maintenance thereof.
(d)
The Planning Board shall notify all abutters within 300 feet of
the perimeter of the subdivision of the date, time and place
that the preliminary plan will be considered, in order to receive
input on the overall plan design, prior to application for the
special permit and definitive plan approval.
(e)
Within 45 days after the receipt of a complete preliminary plan
application as specified herein, the Planning Board shall give its
approval, with or without modifications, or shall disapprove the
proposal stating its reasons. The Town Clerk shall be notified in
writing of such action. Preliminary approval for an open space
residential development shall be valid for a period of six months.
(2)
Definitive application.
Applicants for a special permit for open space residential
development shall, at the time of filing the application, submit a
definitive subdivision open space residential development plan in
conformity with § 240-17 herein, and the Subdivision Rules and
(1)
P.
§ 240-17 BARNSTABLE CODE § 240-17
232:344
Regulations of the Planning Board.44 The plan shall be derived from
the approved preliminary concept plan required above. In addition
to the materials required for submission of a definitive subdivision
plan, the applicant shall submit documents signed by all owners
and applicants as follows: deed of open space lot or lots to the
Town, to a corporation, trust of homeowners, or to a nonprofit
conservation organization; the corporation or trust documents; and
Form 1A where applicable.45
The definitive development plan shall show the location of a cluster
unit wastewater system or recreational facilities, if any.
(2)
The definitive plan shall indicate the limit of clearing along
roadways, within both building lots and the open space lot or lots,
and around any commonly owned facilities.
(3)
A maintenance plan for the open space lot or lots shall be submitted
where required.
(4)
A note shall appear on the plan to the effect that "No lot as shown
on this plan and approved in accordance with the open space
residential development provisions of the Zoning Ordinance of the
Town of Barnstable shall be further divided."
(5)
Upon receipt of an open space residential development application,
the Planning Board shall proceed as with applications for special
permits under MGL Ch. 40A. Hearings on an application for a
special permit under this section shall be held simultaneously with
definitive subdivision plan review hearings.
(6)
Approved open space residential developments.
Within 30 days of the Planning Board's endorsement of approval of
the subdivision plan, the applicant shall record the plan, together
with the following documents: the decision of the Planning Board;
the deed of open space to the Town, or to a trust or corporation,
or to a nonprofit conservation organization; Form 1A; the trust or
corporation documents; as well as development agreements and
covenants required under the Subdivision Rules and Regulations.
Failure to comply with this provision shall result in the Planning
Board approval being considered null and void. Upon application
to the Planning Board, the Board may extend the thirty-day
recordation period for good cause.
(1)
Period of validity: The provisions of § 240-125C(3) shall apply.
[Amended 5-7-2009 by Order No. 2009-077]
(2)
Q.
44.Editor's Note: See Ch. 801, Subdivision Rules and Regulations.
45.Editor's Note: Form 1A is included at the end of Ch. 801, Subdivision Rules and
Regulations.
§ 240-17 WASTEWATER DISCHARGE § 240-17
232:345
§ 240-17.1. Private-initiated affordable housing development.
[Added 11-18-2004 by Order No. 2004-114]
A request to modify the open space residential development
subdivision plan requiring a change in the configuration of the open
space, or the road right-of-way shall require a duly noticed public
hearing and notification of all parties in interest, pursuant to MGL
Ch. 40A, § 15. The Planning Board shall decide whether or not the
addition of recreational facilities or a change in location of such
facilities shall constitute a modification of the approved plan. If lots
have been conveyed out on an individual basis, the applicant for a
modification of the special permit and/or installation of recreational
facilities shall provide the Planning Board with evidence of the
power to act upon the behalf of the corporation or trust of owners
of the open space.
(3)
An application for endorsement of approval-not-required plans to adjust
lot lines between abutting lot owners, not involving open space lot lines
or road right-of-way lines, shall not be considered a modification of
the subdivision, or require notice to owners or abutters, provided that
such plan and building locations comply with all the requirements of
§ 240-17 herein.
R.
Purpose. The purpose of this section is to authorize by special permit
privately initiated affordable housing by for-profit or not-for-profit
organizations that:
Provide for residential development in a manner that is consistent
with existing neighborhood development in terms of density and
housing types; and
(1)
Authorize an increase in the permissible density of housing in
a proposed development, provided that the applicant shall, as a
condition for the grant of said special permit, provide housing for
persons of low or moderate income.
(2)
A.
Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
AFFORDABLE UNIT — A dwelling unit reserved in perpetuity for
ownership by a household earning less than 80% of area median family
income, and priced to conform with the standards of the Massachusetts
Department of Housing and Community Development (DHCD) for
ownership units set forth in 760 CMR 45.03(4), in order that such
affordable units shall be included in the DHCD Subsidized Housing
Inventory.
APPLICANT — The person or persons, including a corporation or other
legal entity, who applies for issuance of a special permit for
construction of a private-initiated affordable housing development (PIAHD)
hereunder. The applicant must own, or be the beneficial owner
of, all the land included in the proposed PI-AHD, or have authority from
B.
§ 240-17 BARNSTABLE CODE § 240-17.1
232:346
the owner(s) to act for the owner(s) or hold an option or contract duly
executed by the owner(s) and the applicant giving the latter the right
to acquire the land to be included in the site.
BEDROOM — A separate room within a dwelling unit intended for, or
which customarily could be used for, sleeping.
PRIVATE INITIATED AFFORDABLE HOUSING DEVELOPMENT (PIAHD)
— A development of single-family residential dwellings
(detached), including required affordable units, and permissible
accessory structures on seven acres or more authorized by special
permit from the Planning Board as set forth herein.
Application.
An application for a special permit for a PI-AHD shall be submitted
to the Planning Board on forms furnished by the Planning Board,
accompanied by the following:
Information pertaining to any association which the applicant
proposes to form for the private management of the PI-AHD.
(a)
Copies of all proposed documents as required for the
subdivision, including architectural rendering and layouts of
proposed homes to be built and landscaping plans.
(b)
Copies of proposed deed restrictions and monitoring
agreements, drafted consistent with all requirements of 760
CMR 45 Local Initiative Program (LIP), and guidelines
promulgated thereunder assuring the affordable units remain
affordable in perpetuity, and assuring the resale of affordable
units at the restricted price, and providing a right of first
refusal in favor of the Town.
(c)
(1)
Copies of the application and accompanying materials shall be
transmitted forthwith to the Barnstable Housing Committee for
review and comment. Said Committee shall have 45 days after
receipt thereof to make written recommendations to the Planning
Board. Failure to make such written recommendation shall be
deemed a lack of opposition thereto.
(2)
C.
Standards. In order to be eligible for consideration for a special permit,
the proposed PI-AHD shall meet all of the following standards:
Qualifying area. The site shall be located entirely within the RC-1
Zoning District and shall contain at least seven contiguous upland
acres.
(1)
Compliance with applicable regulations and standards. All plans
and development shall comply with all applicable standards of
the Planning Board's Subdivision Rules and Regulations, including
such waivers as may be granted by the Planning Board.46
(2)
D.
§ 240-17.1 WASTEWATER DISCHARGE § 240-17.1
232:347
Wastewater. All dwellings within the PI-AHD shall be connected to
the municipal wastewater treatment facility.
(3)
Lot shape factor. The numerical lot shape factor as required in
§ 240-7D of the Zoning Ordinance shall not apply. However no
panhandled lot shall be created to a depth greater than two lots
from the principal way.
(4)
Bulk regulations. For all lots and building within the PI-AHD, the
following bulk regulations shall apply:
Minimum Yard Setbacks
(feet)
Minimum
Lot Area
Minimum Lot
Frontage
Minimum
Lot Width
Maximum
Building
Height
(square
feet) (feet) (feet)
Front Side Rear
(feet)
10,000 50; 20 for a lot on
the radius of a
cul-de-sac
65 (1) 15(3) 10(4) 20(4) 30(5)
Notes:
(T1)he Planning Board may grant a waiver to the lot width requirement to individual lots
located on the radius of a cul-de-sac, provided that the grant of the waiver will result in a
proper alignment of the home to the street.
(A2)ccessory structures that require a building permit shall be required to conform to all
setback requirements.
(A3)ccessory garages, whether attached or detached, shall require a minimum front yard
setback of 20 feet.
(T4)he Planning Board may require a planted buffer area within any required rear or side
yard setback area.
(O5)r 2 1/2 stories, whichever is less.
(5)
Parking. A minimum of two on-site parking spaces per dwelling
unit shall be provided. A one-car garage shall count as one parking
space. A two-car garage shall count as two parking spaces.
(6)
Phasing. The applicant, as part of the application for subdivision
approval, may propose a phasing plan identifying the number of
building permits requested to be issued in each year of the phasing
plan. The Planning Board, upon a finding of good cause, may vary
the provisions of § 240-114A and B and § 240-115B(1) through (3)
herein and allow for the allocation to the applicant of the number
of building permits proposed in the phasing plan or any different
(7)
46.Editor's Note: See Ch. 801, Subdivision Regulations.
§ 240-17.1 BARNSTABLE CODE § 240-17.1
232:348
number that the Planning Board deems appropriate, provided that,
at the time of the granting of the special permit, the determined
number of building permits are available and that no more than
1/4 of each year's allocation under § 240-114A and B shall be
allocated to the applicant. Every permit allocated to the applicant
by the Planning Board shall be included as part of the yearly
building permit allocations under § 240-114A and B. There shall be
no extension of a building permit granted under a phasing plan,
and any unused and/or expired permits shall be credited back as
part of the adjustments under § 240-114D for the next calendar
year.
Visitability. The Planning Board may require that some or all of the
dwelling units provide access for visitors in accordance with the
recommendations of the Barnstable Housing Committee.
(8)
Affordable units. At least 20% of the dwelling units shall be affordable
units, subject to the following conditions:
The affordable unit shall be affordable in perpetuity. A deed rider
shall assure this condition. The deed rider shall be structured to
survive any and all foreclosures.
(1)
The continuing enforcement of the deed rider through subsequent
resale of the affordable units shall be the subject of a monitoring
agreement.
(2)
The deed rider and the monitoring agreement shall be drafted in
compliance with 760 CMR 45.00 Local Initiative Program (LIP)
and guidelines promulgated thereunder. The deed rider and the
monitoring agreement shall be subject to review and approval by
the Planning Board and approved as to form by the Town Attorney's
office prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy for any
dwelling unit.
(3)
The affordable unit shall conform to the standards of the
Department of Housing and Community Development (DHCD) for
inclusion in the DHCD Subsidized Housing Inventory.
(4)
A right of first refusal upon the transfer of such affordable units
shall be granted to the Town or its designee for a period not less
than 120 days after notice thereof.
(5)
The affordable units shall not be segregated within the PI-AHD. The
affordable units shall satisfy the design and construction standards
and guidelines of the Local Initiative Program, 760 CMR 45.00,
with regard to distinguishability from market rate units. It is the
intent of this section that the affordable units shall be eligible for
inclusion in the DHCD Subsidized Housing Inventory as LIP units.
(6)
E.
§ 240-17.1 WASTEWATER DISCHARGE § 240-17.1
232:349
§ 240-18. (Reserved)47
§ 240-19. (Reserved)48
§ 240-20. West Barnstable Village Business District.49
The affordable units shall be constructed and occupancy permits
issued at the rate of one affordable unit for every four market rate
units.
(7)
In computing the number of required affordable units, any fraction
of a unit shall be rounded up, and the result shall be the number of
affordable units to be built within the PI-AHD and not off site.
(8)
No special permit shall be granted unless the affordable dwelling
units have been approved by the DHCD as eligible for the
Affordable Housing Inventory under 760 CMR 45.00, the LIP
Program.
(9)
Decision. The Planning Board may grant a special permit for a PI-AHD
where it makes the following findings:
The proposed PI-AHD complies with all applicable Subdivision
Rules and Regulations, the Zoning Ordinance and the requirements
of this section except as they may be waived by the Board;
(1)
The proposed PI-AHD provides affordable units consistent with the
requirements set forth herein;
(2)
The proposed PI-AHD does not cause substantial detriment to the
neighborhood.
(3)
F.
Relation to other requirements. The submittals and special permit
required herein shall be in addition to any other requirements of the
Subdivision Control Law or any other provisions of this Zoning
Ordinance.
G.
Purpose and intent. The purposes and intent of this section is to guide
development and redevelopment in West Barnstable Village Business
District so that it:
Promotes a location-appropriate scale and traditional mix of
business, institutional and residential land uses that contribute
to and respect the historic character and historic neighborhood
development patterns.
(1)
A.
47.Editor's Note: Former § 240-18, PR Professional Residential District, as amended, was
repealed 7-14-2005 by Order No. 2005-100.
48.Editor's Note: Former § 240-19, OR Office Residential District, as amended, was repealed
7-14-2005 by Order No. 2005-100.
49.Editor's Note: Former § 240-20, O-1, O-2 and O-3 Office Districts, as amended, was
repealed 7-14-2005 by Order No. 2005-100.
§ 240-17.1 BARNSTABLE CODE § 240-20
232:350
Acknowledges the historic context of the village and preserves or
enhances historic buildings or other historic resources.
(2)
(3) Protects and preserves the historic and scenic streetscape.
Provides a variety of functions that support residents' day-to-day
use of the district.
(4)
Supports and enhances the diverse local economy and retains
established village goods and service offerings.
(5)
Preserves and protects the traditional New England village
character of West Barnstable through architectural design that
replicates in scale and character the best examples of traditional
neighborhood design from the historic towns and villages of Cape
Cod and New England to enhance the aesthetic quality of
Barnstable as a whole.
(6)
Conforms with the Old Kings Highway Regional Historic District
Act.
(7)
Is consistent with the Barnstable Comprehensive Plan and the West
Barnstable Village Plan.
(8)
The following uses are permitted in the WBVBD, provided that no
operation shall result in the treatment, generation, storage or disposal
of hazardous materials, except as follows: household quantities; waste
oil retention facilities for small-scale retailers of motor oil required and
operated in compliance with MGL c. 21 § 52A; oil on site for heating of
a structure or to supply an emergency generator.
Principal permitted uses.
Single-family residential dwelling. A single-family residential
dwelling may be freestanding or attached to a building also
used for nonresidential uses. More than one single-family
residential dwelling per lot is permitted as long as there is a
minimum of one acre per single-family dwelling, but in no case
will more than one principal permitted single-family residential
dwelling be contained in any one building.
(a)
(b) Small-scale retail store.
(c) Professional, business or medical office.
Office of a bank, credit union, savings and loan or other
financial institution.
(d)
(1)
Accessory uses. The following uses are permitted as accessory uses
in the WBVBD:
Bed-and-breakfast operation within an owner-occupied singlefamily
residential structure, subject to the provisions of
§ 240-11C(6) except Subsection C(6)(b)[1] and [2]. No more
(a)
(2)
B.
§ 240-20 WASTEWATER DISCHARGE § 240-20
232:351
than three total rooms shall be rented to not more than six total
guests at any one time in the WBVBD. No special permit shall
be required in the WBVBD. For the purposes of this section,
children under the age of 12 years shall not be considered in
the total number of guests.
Automated banking facilities (ATM) shall be located within a
principal building and shall not be accessed from the exterior
of the building.
(b)
Accessory apartments as provided for in the Town of
Barnstable Code, Chapter 9, Affordable Housing, Article II,
Accessory Apartments and Apartment Units.
(c)
Special permit uses. The following uses are permitted, provided
that a special permit is first obtained from the Special Permit
Granting Authority(SPGA) subject to the provisions of § 240-125C
herein and subject to the specific standards for such uses as
required in this section:
(a) Artisans and craftspeople.
(b) Personal service business.
Windmills and other devices for the conversion of wind energy
to electrical or mechanical energy subject to the provisions of
§ 240-44.1.
(c)
(3)
Special permit performance standards. In addition to the standards
for the grant of a special permit set forth in § 240-125C, the grant
of any special permit within the WBVBD requires findings to
support that the development meets the following criteria:
Is compatible with and supports the purpose and intent of this
section.
(a)
(b) Mitigates impacts to safety and congestion from development.
Protects and preserves water supply for both drinking water
and fire protection.
(c)
Stormwater shall be contained on site and mitigated using best
management practices.
(d)
Manages waste, by-products and other debris that may be
associated with artisan and craft use in a manner compatible
with abutting or nearby residential uses.
(e)
Does not generate noise, vibration, smoke, dust or other
particulate matter, odors, heat, glare or intrude with similar
nuisance on abutting or nearby residential uses.
(f)
Storage of all raw material and finished product associated
with artisan or craft use shall be stored within a duly permitted
(g)
(4)
§ 240-20 BARNSTABLE CODE § 240-20
232:352
permanent structure. All outdoor storage associated with
artisan or craft use is prohibited.
Deliveries may take place not sooner than one hour before, or
later than one hour after the permitted operating hours of a
business.
(h)
Vehicles are prohibited from running motors, refrigeration
units or other mechanical units outside of permitted hours of
operation.
(i)
Bulk regulations.
Minimum Yard Setbacks
Minimum
Lot Area
(square feet)
Minimum
Lot
Frontage
(feet)
Minimum
Lot
Width
(feet)
Front3
(feet)
Side
(feet)
Rear
(feet)
Maximum
Building
Height
(feet)
Maximum
Lot
Coverage
as % of
Lot Area
43,560 160 — 30 30 30 301 102
NOTES:
1 Or two stories, whichever is lesser
2 No more than 33% of the total upland area of any lot shall be made impervious by the
installation of buildings, structures and paved surfaces.
3 Front yard landscaped setback from the road lot line: 20 feet. Existing trees and shrubs
shall be retained within the road right-of-way and within the required front yard landscaped
setback and supplemented with other landscape materials, in accordance with accepted
landscape practices. Where natural vegetation cannot be retained, the front yard
landscaped setback shall be landscaped with a combination of grasses, trees and shrubs
commonly found on Cape Cod. A minimum of one street tree with a minimum caliper of
three inches shall be provided per 30 feet of road frontage distributed throughout the
front yard setback area. No plantings shall obscure site at entrance and exit drives and
road intersections. All landscaped areas shall be continuously maintained, substantially in
accordance with any site plan approved pursuant to Article IX herein.
(5)
Nonconforming use limitations. Within the WBVBD the change of
a nonconforming use to another nonconforming use is prohibited
notwithstanding the provisions of § 240-94A. A nonconforming use
shall only be permitted to change to a principal permitted use as
of right or to a special permit use as provided for by the grant of a
special permit pursuant to § 240-20B(3) and (4) herein.
(6)
Corporate branding. Buildings, colors, signage, architectural
features, text, symbols, graphics, other attention-getting devices
and landscape elements that are trademarked, branded or
designed to identify with a particular formula business chain or
corporation are prohibited. All structures and sites shall be
(7)
§ 240-20 WASTEWATER DISCHARGE § 240-20
232:353
designed to include architectural and design elements that are
consistent with the WBVBD architectural composition, character,
and historic context. Interior corporate branding elements shall
not be visible to the street through windows, doors or by any
other means. The Town will work with applicants to adapt critical
functional features of prototype plans to their sites, but will not
accept standard plans, building forms, elevations, materials, or
colors that do not relate to the site, adjacent development or West
Barnstable community character.
Site development standards. In addition to Article IX, Site Plan
Review, and Article VI, Off-Street Parking, the following additional
requirements shall apply within the WBVBD.
Loading docks. Loading docks shall be screened from
Meetinghouse Way (Route 149), Main Street (Route 6A),
Lombard Avenue, Navigation Road, Packet Landing Road and
Whitecap Lane with landscaping or fencing materials of an
appropriate scale.
(a)
To the greatest extent feasible, all new parking areas shall be
located to the side and rear of the building. Parking is not
permitted in the required front yard setback with the exception
of parking required by ADA compliance as determined by the
Building Commissioner.
(b)
Curb cuts and driveways.
Shared driveways and parking area interconnections are
strongly encouraged. No more than one curb cut on
Meetinghouse Way (Route 149, Main Street (Route 6A),
Lombard Avenue, Packet Landing Road, Navigation Road
and Whitecap Lane shall be allowed for any lot. For traffic
safety and to reduce traffic congestion, no new driveways
shall be permitted on Route 149, Route 6A, Lombard
Avenue and Whitecap Lane within 200 feet of any
intersection.
[1]
Driveways shall not exceed the width required by site plan
review.
[2]
(c)
Lighting. In no case shall exterior or outdoor lighting cause
glare that impacts motorists, pedestrians or neighboring
premises.
All exterior lighting shall use full cutoff light fixtures in
which no more than 2.5% of the total output is emitted at
90° from the vertical pole or building wall on which it is
mounted.
[1]
[2] Up-lighting is prohibited.
(d)
(8)
§ 240-20 BARNSTABLE CODE § 240-20
232:354
§ 240-21. B, BA and UB Business Districts. [Amended 2-20-1997;
3-11-1999 by Order No. 99-056]
Definitions. The following terms are defined in the WBVBD and
shall not be construed to apply to other regulations.
ARTISAN OR CRAFTSPERSON USE — A small-scale use that
typically employs one or two people who practice craft or artisan
activities. A key feature of works produced by artisans or
craftspeople is the high degree of manual expertise involved. The
use must be compatible with abutting and nearby residential and
nonresidential uses. The following is included in the definition of
"artisan or craftsperson use:"
PERSONAL SERVICE — Establishments engaged in the provision
of services, but not goods, of a personal nature to individuals and
households. Such establishments include barbershop, beauty salon,
clothing repair or seamstress shop, shoe repair shop, florist and
day spas. Personal service establishments that are not commonly
found in rural village environments such as check cashing services,
fortune tellers, psychics, palm readers and similar services, spas
and hot tubs for rent, tanning, piercing and similar services are
prohibited.
SMALL-SCALE RETAIL STORE — Small stores and businesses,
including but not limited to, corner groceries, bookstore, galleries
and other small retail uses typically found in small New England
towns. Small-scale retail does not include retail or commercial
buildings or storage designed to serve a large volume of customers,
e.g. gasoline and oil filling stations, garages for automotive repair.
Small-scale retail is subject to corporate branding limitations as
described herein and shall not include drive-through window
service.
ARTISAN OR CRAFTSPERSON — A person using manual skills
to produce, in limited quantities, ornamental or functional
works in ceramic, glass, metal, paper, wood or textiles.
Examples include, without limitation, the following: drawing,
painting, sculpture, pottery, photography, graphic design,
interior design, fashion design, jewelry making, wood turning,
glass blowing, furniture making, small wooden boat building,
upholstering and weaving.
(a)
(9)
Principal permitted uses. The following uses are permitted in the B, BA
and UB Districts:
(1) Retail and wholesale store/salesroom.
(2) Retail trade service or shop.
(3) Office and bank.
(4) Restaurant and other food establishment.
A.
§ 240-20 WASTEWATER DISCHARGE § 240-21
232:355
Place of business of baker, barber, blacksmith, builder, carpenter,
caterer, clothes cleaner or presser, confectioner, contractor,
decorator, dressmaker, dyer, electrician, florist, furrier, hairdresser,
hand laundry, manicurist, mason, milliner, news dealer, optician,
painter, paper hanger, photographer, plumber, printer, publisher,
roofer, shoemaker, shoe repairer, shoe shiner, tailor, tinsmith,
telephone exchange, telegraph office, undertaker, upholsterer,
wheelwright.
(5)
(6) Gasoline and oil filling stations and garages.
Hotel/motel subject to the provisions of Subsection F herein, except
that hotels/motels shall be prohibited in the BA District and
prohibited in the Osterville UB District.
(7)
(8) Any other ordinary business use of a similar nature.
Multifamily dwellings (apartments) subject to the provisions of
Subsection A(9)(a) through (i) herein, except that multifamily
dwellings shall be prohibited in the BA District. [Amended
7-14-2005 by Order No. 2005-100]
The minimum lot area ratio shall be 5,000 square feet of lot
area per each apartment unit for new multifamily structures
and conversions of existing buildings.
(a)
The maximum lot coverage shall be 20% of the gross upland
area of the lot or combination of lots.
(b)
The maximum height of a multifamily dwelling shall not exceed
three stories or 35 feet, whichever is lesser.
(c)
The minimum front yard setback shall be 50 feet or three times
the building height, whichever is greater.
(d)
The minimum side and rear yard setbacks shall be not less than
the height of the building.
(e)
A perimeter green space of not less than 20 feet in width shall
be provided, such space to be planted and maintained as green
area and to be broken only in a front yard by a driveway.
(f)
Off-street parking shall be provided on site at a ratio of 1.5
spaces per each apartment unit and shall be located not less
than 30 feet from the base of the multifamily dwelling and be
easily accessible from a driveway on the site.
(g)
No living units shall be constructed or used below ground
level.
(h)
The Zoning Board of Appeals may allow by special permit a
maximum lot coverage of up to 50% of the gross area of the lot
or combination of lots.
(i)
(9)
§ 240-21 BARNSTABLE CODE § 240-21
232:356
Multifamily dwellings (apartments) for active adult or assisted
living located in the IND District, where the project includes
a total project land area of 24 acres or more and is subject
to a Senior Continuing Care Retirement Community Overlay
District (SCCRCOD) (§ 240-29), the following regulations shall
apply in lieu of all other bulk and dimensional, parking,
landscaping, screening, and setbacks as may otherwise be
applicable, and which shall apply to the entire project land
area as if it were one lot, even though it may be composed of
more than one lot, which lots may be separated by a street or
way: [Added 5-19-2016 by Order No. 2016-146]
Minimum total project land area of 24 acres, including
therein any streets or ways.
[1]
Minimum project land area ratio shall be 3,000 square feet
of project land area per each dwelling unit.
[2]
[3] Maximum building height shall be 60 feet/five stories.
[4] Minimum front yard setback: 30 feet.
Landscape buffers (driveways, signage, lighting and
walkways excepted):
[a] Front yard: 20 feet.
[b] Side and rear yard: 10 feet.
[5]
Parking.
For active adult dwelling units, off-street parking shall
be provided at a ratio of 0.75 resident space per
dwelling unit, 0.5 guest space per dwelling unit, and
0.75 employee space per five dwelling units;
[a]
For assisted living dwelling units, off-street parking
shall be provided at a ratio of 0.5 resident space per
dwelling unit, 0.5 guest space per dwelling unit, and
0.75 employee space per five dwelling units.
[b]
[6]
To the extent a project developed pursuant to this
§ 240-21A(9)(j) is also subject to the Groundwater
Protection Overlay District regulations set forth in
§ 240-35, the lot coverage and site clearing requirements
of such § 240-35 shall be calculated using the entire
project land area as described in this section. All allowed
impervious area may be located on an individual lot within
the project land area, provided the impervious area
requirements are met over the entire project land area.
[7]
(j)
§ 240-21 WASTEWATER DISCHARGE § 240-21
232:357
Single-family residential structure (detached), except that singlefamily
residential structures shall not be permitted in the B
District.
(10)
Accessory uses.
Bed-and-breakfast operation within an owner-occupied singlefamily
residential structure, subject to the provisions of
§ 240-11C(6) except Subsections (b)[1] and [2]. No more than six
total rooms shall be rented to not more than 12 total guests at
any one time, and no special permit shall be required. For the
purposes of this section, children under the age of 12 years shall
not be considered in the total number of guests. Bed-and-breakfast
operations shall not be permitted in the B District.
(1)
B.
Conditional uses. The following uses are permitted as conditional uses
in the B, BA and UB Districts, provided that a special permit is first
obtained from the Zoning Board of Appeals subject to the provisions of
§ 240-125C herein and the specific standards for such conditional uses
as required in this section:
Storage yards for coal, oil, junk, lumber or any business requiring
use of a railroad siding; such uses being provided for in the B
District only.
(1)
A building or place for recreation or amusement but not to include
a use which is principally the operation of coin-operated
amusement devices; such uses being provided for in the B District
only.
(2)
Any manufacturing use; such uses being provided for in the B
District only.
(3)
Windmills and other devices for the conversion of wind energy to
electrical or mechanical energy, but only as an accessory use.
(4)
Public or private regulation golf courses subject to the provisions
of § 240-11C(2) herein.
(5)
C.
D. Special permit uses. (Reserved for future use.)
E. Bulk regulations.
§ 240-21 BARNSTABLE CODE § 240-21
232:358
Minimum Yard
Setbacks
Zoning
Districts
Minimum
Lot Area
(square
feet)
Minimum
Lot
Frontage
(feet)
Minimum
Lot
Width
(feet)
Front
(feet)
Side
(feet)
Rear
(feet)
Maximum
Building
Height
(feet)
Maximum
Lot
Coverage
as % of
Lot Area
B — 20 — 201 — — 303 —
BA — 20 — 20 — — 303 35
UB — 20 — 202 02 02 303 35
NOTES:
1 One hundred feet along Routes 28 and 132.
2 Fifty feet when abutting a residentially zoned area.
3 Or two stories, whichever is lesser.
Front yard landscaped setback from the road lot line:
B Business District: 10 feet, except 50 feet along Attucks Lane Extension and Independence
Drive.
BA District: 10 feet.
UB District: 10 feet.
Existing trees and shrubs shall be retained within the road right-of-way and within the
required front yard landscaped setback and supplemented with other landscape materials, in
accordance with accepted landscape practices. Where natural vegetation cannot be retained,
the front yard landscaped setback shall be landscaped with a combination of grasses, trees
and shrubs commonly found on Cape Cod. A minimum of one street tree with a minimum
caliper of three inches shall be provided per 30 feet of road frontage distributed throughout
the front yard setback area. No plantings shall obscure site at entrance and exit drives and
road intersections. All landscaped areas shall be continuously maintained, substantially in
accordance with any site plan approved pursuant to Article IX herein
Special hotel/motel provisions. In addition to the provisions of
Subsection E, hotels and motels shall be developed only in conformance
with the following:
The minimum lot area ratio shall be 2,500 square feet of lot area
per each of the first 10 hotel/motel units, and an additional 250
square feet of lot area per each unit in excess of 10.
(1)
(2) The minimum lot frontage shall be 125 feet.
The maximum lot coverage for all buildings shall not exceed 30%
of the gross land area.
(3)
F.
§ 240-21 WASTEWATER DISCHARGE § 240-21
232:359
§ 240-22. (Reserved)50
§ 240-23. MB-A1, MB-A2 and MB-B Business Districts.
In addition to the parking requirements of § 240-54 herein, there
shall be two additional off-street parking spaces provided per each
10 hotel/motel units or fraction thereof.
(4)
(5) The minimum front yard setback shall be 30 feet.
The minimum total side yard setback shall be 30 feet; provided,
however, that no allocation of such total results in a setback of less
than 10 feet.
(6)
(7) The minimum rear yard setback shall be 20 feet.
No other uses shall be permitted within the required yard setbacks,
except driveways in a required front yard. All yard areas shall be
appropriately landscaped and adequately maintained.
(8)
A site plan for each development or addition shall be submitted to
the Building Commissioner along with the request for a building
permit. The site plan shall include, but not be limited to, all existing
and proposed buildings, structures, parking, driveways, service
areas and other open uses, all drainage facilities and all landscape
features such as fences, walls, planting areas and walks on the site.
(9)
Principal permitted uses. The following uses are permitted in the MBA1,
MB-A2 and MB-B Districts:
Commercial marina to include the berthing, building, sale, rental,
storage and repair of boats, including the storage of boats on
racks within the MB-A1 and MB-A2 Business Districts, subject to
the provisions of Subsection A(6) below, and the installation and
maintenance of docks, piers, ramps, floats and moorings.
(1)
Retail sale of marine fishing and boating supplies, marine
electronics, marine motors and marine communication equipment.
(2)
Retail sale of fishing bait, fish and shellfish, such uses being
provided for in the MB-B District only.
(3)
Commercial fishing, not including commercial canning or
processing of fish; such use being provided for in the MB-B District
only.
(4)
Whale-watching facility, such use being provided for in the MB-B
District only.
(5)
A.
50.Editor's Note: Former § 240-22, BL-B Business District, as amended, was repealed
7-14-2005 by Order No. 2005-100.
§ 240-21 BARNSTABLE CODE § 240-23
232:360
Storage of boats on racks within the MB-A1 Business District
subject to the following provisions:
There shall be no more than 30 boats stored on racks for
seasonal use (June 15 through Sept. 15);
(a)
There shall be no launching or hauling of boats stored on racks
for seasonal use before 8:00 a.m. or after 6:00 p.m.;
(b)
There shall be unlimited year-round rack storage of boats that
are not stored for seasonal use; and
(c)
Any process by which seasonally used boats are launched and
hauled, such as but not limited to by forklift or crane, shall be
undertaken in a manner in which to minimize noise.
(d)
(6)
Craft boat building, including the berthing, sale, rental, storage
and repair of boats, including the storage of boats on racks within
the MB-A1 and MB-A2 Business Districts, subject to the provisions
of Subsection A(6) and the installation and maintenance of docks,
piers, ramps, floats, and moorings. [Added 6-1-2017 by Order
No. 2017-102]
(7)
Accessory uses. The following uses are permitted as accessory uses to
principal permitted use, Subsection A(1), Commercial marina, above.
(1) Retail sale of fuel to marine vessels only.
Not more than one apartment for occupancy by the marina owner
or by staff employed at the marina.
(2)
B.
Conditional uses. The following uses are permitted as conditional uses
in the MB-A1 and MB-A2 and MB-B Districts, provided that a special
permit is first obtained from the Zoning Board of Appeals subject to the
provisions of § 240-125C herein and subject to the specific standards
for such conditional uses as required in this section:
(1) Restaurant, such use being provided for in the MB-B District only.
Windmills and other devices for the conversion of wind energy to
electrical or mechanical energy, but only as an accessory use.
(2)
C.
Special permit uses.
In the MB-A1 and MB-A2 Districts only, the retail sale of marinerelated
equipment, sporting-goods-type clothing, marine-related
decorative goods and furnishings, as an accessory use to principal
permitted use, Subsection A(1) above only
(1)
D.
The following use limitations shall apply within the MB-B only: [Added
3-18-2010 by Order No. 2010-06851]
E.
51.Editor's Note: This order also redesignated former Subsection E as Subsection G.
§ 240-23 WASTEWATER DISCHARGE § 240-23
232:361
Use limitations: A permitted retail establishment, lodging
establishment, restaurant, or take-out food establishment shall not
include a business which is required by contractual or other
arrangement to maintain one or more of the following items:
standardized ("formula") array of services and/or merchandise,
trademark, logo, service mark, symbol, decor, architecture, layout,
uniform, or similar standardized features and which causes it to
be substantially identical to more than eight other businesses
regardless of ownership or location. Drive-up windows and/or
drive-through facilities are prohibited.
(1)
Corporate branding prohibition: Buildings, colors, signage,
architectural features, text, symbols, graphics, other attentiongetting
devices and landscape elements that are trademarked,
branded or designed to identify with a particular formula business
chain or corporation are prohibited. Interior corporate branding
elements shall not be visible to the street through windows, doors
or any other means. [Amended 9-8-2011by Order No.
2011-138]
(2)
F. (Reserved)
Bulk regulations. [Amended 3-11-1999 by Order No. 99-058;
7-19-2001 by Order No. 2001-099; 6-1-2017 by Order No.
2017-102]
Minimum Yard
Setbacks
(feet)
Zoning
District
Minimum
Lot Area
(square
feet)
Minimum
Lot
Frontage
(feet)
Minimum
Lot Width
(feet) Front Side Rear
Maximum
Building
Height
(feet)
Maximum
Lot
Coverage
as % of Lot
Area
MB-A1
MB-A2
10,000 20 — — — — 301 —
MB-B 7,500 20 75 10 302 30 301 —
1Or two stories, whichever is lesser
2The minimum total side yard setback shall be 30 feet, provided that no allocation of such total
results in a setback of less than 10 feet, except abutting a residential district, where a minimum
of 20 feet is required.
NOTE:
A. Front yard landscaped setback from the road lot line:
MB-A1 and MB-A2 Business District: 10 feet.
MB-B Business District: 10 feet.
G.
§ 240-23 BARNSTABLE CODE § 240-23
232:362
§ 240-24. VB-A Business District. [Amended 11-7-1987 by Art. 5;
10-4-1990 by Order No. 90-68; 2-20-1997; 1-7-1999; 3-11-1999 by
Order No. 99-058]
B. Side/rear yard landscaped setback from residential lot lines:
MB-A1 Business District: 50 feet.
C. Existing trees and shrubs shall be retained within the road right-of-way and within the
required landscaped setbacks and supplemented with other landscape materials, in
accordance with accepted landscape practices. Where natural vegetation cannot be
retained, the landscaped setback shall be landscaped with a combination of grasses, trees
and shrubs commonly found on Cape Cod. A minimum of one street tree with a minimum
caliper of three inches shall be provided per 30 feet of road frontage distributed throughout
the front yard setback area. No plantings shall obscure site at entrance and exit drives and
road intersections. All landscape areas shall be continuously maintained, substantially in
accordance with any site plan approved pursuant to Article IX herein.
Principal permitted uses. The following uses are permitted in
Subsections (1) through (5) below in the VB-A: [Amended 9-8-2011
by Order No. 2011-138]
(1) Single-family residential dwelling (detached).
(2) Retail store.
(3) Professional or business office.
Branch office of a bank, credit union, or savings and loan
institution.
(4)
(5) Personal service business.
A.
Accessory uses. The following uses are permitted as accessory uses in
the VB-A District:
Apartments, provided they are:
Accessory to uses listed in Subsection A(2) through (5) herein;
and
(a)
(b) Located above the first floor only; and
Comply with the standards of § 240-19A(10)(a) through (h)
herein.
(c)
(1)
Bed-and-breakfast operation within an owner-occupied singlefamily
residential structure, subject to the provisions of
§ 240-11C(6) except Subsections (b)[1] and [2]. No more than six
total rooms shall be rented to no more than 12 total guests at any
one time in the VB-A Business District. No special permit shall be
required in the VB-A Business District. For the purposes of this
section, children under the age of 12 years shall not be considered
(2)
B.
§ 240-23 WASTEWATER DISCHARGE § 240-24
232:363
in the total number of guests. [Amended 9-8-2011 by Order No.
2011-138]
Conditional uses. The following uses are permitted as conditional uses
in the VB-A District, provided that a special permit is first obtained from
the Zoning Board of Appeals subject to the provisions of § 240-125C
herein and subject to the specific standards for such conditional uses
as required in this section:
Restaurant or other food-service establishment, but not including
drive-in restaurants.
(1)
Gasoline and oil filling stations subject to the following:
(a) There shall be no sale of vehicles on the same premises; and
(b) There shall be no storage of vehicles on the premises.
(2)
Auto service and repair shops subject to the following:
(a) Such use shall be limited to two service/repair bays; and
(b) There shall be no sale of vehicles on the same premises; and
Any outside storage of vehicles shall be screened from view to
a height of six feet; and
(c)
(d) Any stored vehicles shall bear a current vehicle registration.
(3)
Windmills and other devices for the conversion of wind energy to
electrical or mechanical energy, subject to the following:
Such use remains accessory to a principal use permitted in
Subsection A herein; and
(a)
A building permit shall be obtained prior to commencement of
construction of such use.
(b)
(4)
Place of business of blacksmith, decorator, upholsterer or
undertaker.
(5)
(6) Telephone exchange.
Place of business of building trades subject to the following:
Not more than three full-time employees shall be on the
premises at any time; and
(a)
Any outside parking of commercial vehicles or equipment shall
be screened from view to a height of six feet; and
(b)
Any outside storage of materials or supplies shall be screened
from view to a height of six feet, and shall be stored to a height
not exceeding six feet.
(c)
(7)
C.
§ 240-24 BARNSTABLE CODE § 240-24
232:364
Light manufacturing uses subject to the following:
The building housing such use shall not exceed 2,000 square
feet of gross floor area; and
(a)
(b) The screening standards of Subsection C(7)(b) and (c) herein.
(8)
Storage yard for coal, oil, lumber, or other business dependent on
using a railroad siding subject to the following:
(a) The screening standards of Subsection C(7)(b) and (c) herein.
(9)
D. (Reserved)52
The following use limitations shall apply within the Barnstable Village
VB-A only: [Added 3-18-2010 by Order No. 2010-068]
Use limitations: A permitted retail establishment, lodging
establishment, restaurant, or take-out food establishment shall not
include a business which is required by contractual or other
arrangement to maintain one or more of the following items:
standardized ("formula") array of services and/or merchandise,
trademark, logo, service mark, symbol, decor, architecture, layout,
uniform, or similar standardized features and which causes it to
be substantially identical to more than eight other businesses
regardless of ownership or location. Drive-up windows and/or
drive-through facilities are prohibited.
(1)
Corporate branding prohibition: Buildings, colors, signage,
architectural features, text, symbols, graphics, other attentiongetting
devices and landscape elements that are trademarked,
branded or designed to identify with a particular formula business
chain or corporation are prohibited. Interior corporate branding
elements shall not be visible to the street through windows, doors
or any other means. [Amended 9-8-2011 by Order No.
2011-138]
(2)
E.
Bulk regulations. [Amended 9-8-2011 by Order No. 2011-138]
Minimum Yard
Setbacks
Zoning
Districts
Minimum
Lot Area
(square
feet)
Minimum
Lot
Frontage
(feet)
Minimum
Lot
Width
(feet)
Front
(feet)
Side
(feet)
Rear
(feet)
Maximum
Building
Height
(feet)
Maximum
Lot
Coverage
as % of
Lot Area
VB-A 10,000 20 100 10 302 20 301 25
F.
52.Editor’s Note: Former Subsection D, Conditional uses, was repealed 9-8-2011 by Order No.
2011-138.
§ 240-24 WASTEWATER DISCHARGE § 240-24
232:365
§ 240-24.1. Hyannis Village Zoning Districts.53 [Added 7-14-2005 by
Order No. 2005-100]
§ 240-24.1.1. Title. [Added 7-14-2005 by Order No. 2005-100]
These districts shall be known as the "Hyannis Village Zoning Districts."
§ 240-24.1.2. General provisions. [Added 7-14-2005 by Order No.
2005-100]
NOTES:
1 Or two stories, whichever is lesser
2 The minimum total side yard setback shall be 30 feet, provided that no allocation of such total
results in a setback of less than the 10 feet, except abutting a residential district, where a
minimum of 20 feet is required.
3 No more than 33% of the total upland area of any lot shall be made impervious by the
installation of buildings, structures and paved surfaces.
Front yard landscaped setback from the road lot line:
VB-A 10 feet.
Existing trees and shrubs shall be retained within the road right-of-way and within the
required front yard landscaped setback and supplemented with other landscape materials, in
accordance with accepted landscape practices. Where natural vegetation cannot be retained,
the front yard landscaped setback shall be landscaped with a combination of grasses, trees
and shrubs commonly found on Cape Cod. A minimum of one street tree with a minimum
caliper of three inches shall be provided per 30 feet of road frontage distributed throughout
the front yard setback area. No plantings shall obscure site at entrance and exit drives and
road intersections. All landscaped areas shall be continuously maintained, substantially in
accordance with any site plan approved pursuant to Article IX herein.
Effective date: This section shall become effective upon the adoption
of a Design and Infrastructure Plan by the Barnstable Planning Board,
as set forth in § 240-24.1.11 below. The foregoing shall be adopted not
later than October 15, 2005.
A.
Conflicts. Unless otherwise stated, the requirements of the Barnstable
Zoning Ordinance shall apply to uses within the Hyannis Village Zoning
Districts. In the event of a conflict, these regulations shall apply.
B.
Nonconforming uses. The change of a nonconforming use to another
nonconforming use is prohibited in the Hyannis Village Zoning
Districts.
C.
Site plan review. All development within the Hyannis Village Zoning
Districts, with the exception of single-family residences, shall comply
with the provisions of Article IX, § 240-103, Site development
D.
53.Editor's Note: The specific regulations for the Hyannis Village Zoning District are found in
§§ 240-24.1.1 through 240-24.1.12.
§ 240-24 BARNSTABLE CODE § 240-24.1.2
232:366
standards, and with the Design and Infrastructure Plan. Refer to
§ 240-24.1.10 and individual district regulations below for additional
site plan review standards.
Special permit granting authority and special permit criteria.
Within the Hyannis Village Zoning Districts, the Planning Board
shall be the special permit granting authority. The Planning Board
shall follow the criteria and procedures set forth in § 240-125C of
the Barnstable Zoning Ordinance when acting on a special permit
application. In addition to the criteria set forth in § 240-125, the
Planning Board shall find that the issuance of the special permit is
consistent with the Design and Infrastructure Plan, including the
payment of applicable impact fees, and that the development meets
one or more of the following criteria:
The development provides for or supports mixed use
development where appropriate;
(a)
The development maintains or improves pedestrian access and
outdoor public spaces;
(b)
The development contributes to the historic and maritime
character of the Hyannis Village area;
(c)
The development eliminates or minimizes curb cuts and
driveways on Route 28 and Barnstable Road;
(d)
The development provides or preserves views from public ways
and spaces to the waterfront and provides or preserves public
access to the waterfront;
(e)
The development provides for or contributes to alternative
transportation or travel demand management; and/or
(f)
The development provides workforce housing where
appropriate and provides an appropriate mix of affordability
levels.
(g)
(1)
Refer to individual district regulations below for additional special
permit criteria.
(2)
E.
Dimensional relief. Within the Hyannis Village Zoning Districts, the
SPGA may provide relief from minimum lot area, minimum lot frontage,
maximum building setback, minimum yard setbacks, floor area ratio
limits, facade length requirements, ground floor window requirements,
and through lot requirements, when such relief is necessary to ensure
that a proposed development is consistent with zoning, the Design and
Infrastructure Plan and/or the special permit criteria set forth above.
F.
Building expansion/repair on nonconforming lot. The expansion, repair,
alteration or replacement of any legally conforming building or
structure in existence as of July 14, 2005, proposed to be expanded
G.
§ 240-24.1.2 WASTEWATER DISCHARGE § 240-24.1.2
232:367
within the setbacks established herein shall not require a variance or
special permit solely on the basis that the lot is rendered dimensionally
nonconforming by the minimum lot area or minimum lot frontage and/
or maximum building facade length provisions established in this
section.
Building expansion/repair exceeding lot coverage. The expansion,
repair, alteration or replacement of any legally conforming building or
structure in existence as of July 14, 2005, proposed to be expanded
in a manner that increases lot coverage in excess of the maximum lot
coverage provisions established herein shall require a special permit.
H.
Transitional exemptions. This section shall not apply to any
development application that has received site plan approval or a
special permit prior to July 14, 2005, provided that said site plan
approval and/or special permit has been exercised within one year.
I.
Zoning district boundaries. The provisions of Barnstable Zoning
Ordinance § 240-6C(3) do not apply within the Hyannis Village Zoning
Districts.
J.
Related ordinances. The following list of related ordinances is provided
to assist the reader. Applicants must review all Barnstable ordinances,
rules, regulations and guidelines for additional requirements that may
relate to a particular permit application.
For additional information regarding the requirements of the
Barnstable Inclusionary Housing Ordinance, see Chapter 9 of the
Barnstable Town Code.
(1)
For additional information regarding site plan review
requirements, see §§ 240-98 through 240-105, inclusive, of the
Barnstable Zoning Ordinance.
(2)
For additional information regarding special permit requirements,
see § 240-125C of the Barnstable Zoning Ordinance.
(3)
For additional information regarding growth management
requirements, see §§ 240-110 through 240-122, inclusive, of the
Barnstable Zoning Ordinance.
(4)
For additional information regarding parking requirements, see offstreet
parking regulations, at §§ 240-48 through 240-58, inclusive,
of the Barnstable Zoning Ordinance.
(5)
For additional information regarding signage requirements, see
Sign Regulations, at §§ 240-59 through 240-89, inclusive, of the
Barnstable Zoning Ordinance.
(6)
For additional information regarding historic and design review,
see Ch. 112, Historic Properties, of the Barnstable Town Code.
(7)
K.
§ 240-24.1.2 BARNSTABLE CODE § 240-24.1.2
232:368
§ 240-24.1.3. HVB Hyannis Village Business District. [Added
7-14-2005 by Order No. 2005-100]
Definitions specific to the Hyannis Village Zoning Districts are
contained below at § 240-24.1.12.
L.
Permitted uses. The following principal and accessory uses are
permitted in the HVB District. Uses not expressly allowed are
prohibited.
Permitted principal uses.
(a) *Business and professional offices.
(b) Banks.
(c) Retail uses.
(d) Personal services establishments.
(e) Packaging and delivery services.
(f) *Research and development facilities.
(g) Publishing and printing establishments.
(h) Restaurants.
(i) *Health clubs.
(j) Movie theaters.
(k) Artist's lofts.
(l) Art galleries.
(m) Museums.
(n) Performing arts facilities.
(o) *Educational institutions.
(p) Bed-and-breakfasts.
(q) *Fraternal or social organizations.
(r) Hotels.
(s) Motels.
(t) Conference centers.
(u) Recreational establishments.
Mixed use development consistent with ground floor
limitations established by an asterisk (*) and with building
(v)
(1)
A.
§ 240-24.1.2 WASTEWATER DISCHARGE § 240-24.1.3
232:369
footprint not exceeding 20,000 square feet and totaling not
more than 60,000 square feet.
*Apartments and multifamily housing, not including mixed use
development, totaling not more than 12 dwelling units per acre
* Ground floor limitations: For lots abutting Hyannis Main
Street and located between Sea Street and Barnstable
Road/Ocean Street, uses denoted by an asterisk (*) are
allowed above the ground floor only, with the exception
that uses denoted by an asterisk may occur on the first
floor in the rear portion of such a building only when, at a
minimum, the first 30 feet of ground floor building space
fronting on Hyannis Main Street is occupied by a permitted
principal ground floor use. (See diagram below). In this
case a Hyannis Main Street entrance to the use or uses at
the rear of the building is allowed.
(w)
Permitted accessory uses.
Entertainment and/or dancing is permitted: [Amended
6-1-2006 by Order No. 2006-136]
As an accessory use to a full-service food service
establishment, subject to the following:
[a] Food is served to customers at tables by waitpersons;
Bar seats and bar places do not exceed 20% of
restaurant seats; and
[b]
[1]
(a)
(2)
§ 240-24.1.3 BARNSTABLE CODE § 240-24.1.3
232:370
Any dance floor area shall not exceed 500 square feet,
or 10% of the floor area of the restaurant, whichever
is less.
[c]
As an accessory use to a preexisting smoking bar that has
received a variance from the Barnstable Board of Health,
subject to the following:
The establishment holds a valid Board of Health
variance issued under the provisions of the Barnstable
Code, § 371-18; and
[a]
Any dance floor area shall not exceed 500 square feet,
or 10% of the floor area of the smoking bar.
[b]
[2]
(b) Repair services.
(c) Automated banking facilities (ATM).
Special permits.
(1) Parking facilities.
Permitted principal uses as follows, provided, however, that a
special permit shall not be required when the applicant has
obtained a development of regional impact approval, exemption or
hardship exemption from the Cape Cod Commission:
Nonresidential development with a total floor area greater
than 10,000 square feet.
(a)
Mixed use development with a building footprint greater than
20,000 square feet or a total building square footage greater
than 60,0000 square feet.
(b)
(2)
Multifamily housing, not including mixed use development,
consistent with the ground floor limitations established above, and
proposing 13 or more dwelling units per acre and not more than 16
dwelling units per acre.
(3)
B.
Dimensional, bulk and other requirements.
Minimum Yard
Setbacks
Maximum
Building
Height1
Zoning
District
Minimum
Lot Area
(square
feet)
Minimum
Lot
Frontage
(feet)
Front
(feet)
Rear
(feet)
Side
(feet) Feet Stories
Maximum
Lot
Coverage2 FAR3
Hyannis
Village
5,000 10 4 — — 42 3 100% 3.0
C.
§ 240-24.1.3 WASTEWATER DISCHARGE § 240-24.1.3
232:371
NOTES:
1 See additional height regulations in Subsection (2) below.
2 Maximum lot coverage pertains to building footprint only.
3 Applies to mixed use development only.
4 See also setbacks in Subsection (1) below.
Setbacks.
Maximum building setback.
The maximum building setback from the street line shall
be zero feet for the front and street side facade so that the
building visually reinforces the building facade line of the
street. (See Diagram No. 2 below.).
[1]
Existing buildings within the HVB District not currently
located at the zero maximum building setback may be
altered, expanded, replaced or redeveloped so long as the
maximum building setback is equal to the setback of the
buildings(s) in existence upon the adoption of this section
or 20 feet, whichever is less, and provided that the area
between the building setback and the street line shall
provide permanent public plazas, sidewalk cafes, public
spaces or amenities and/or landscaping.
[2]
The SPGA may vary the maximum building setback for
the building facade, or any portion thereof, and may allow
buildings to be set back from the front and/or street side
property line where it would result in better alignment
of buildings, improved design of the building facade, or
where necessary to accommodate shop entrances,
arcades, plazas, sidewalk cafes, permanent public spaces,
pocket parks, or landscaping required pursuant to the
provisions of this section or as allowed by permit, and so
[3]
(a)
(1)
§ 240-24.1.3 BARNSTABLE CODE § 240-24.1.3
232:372
long as such increase in building setback will not create
significant interruption of the alignment of any sidewalk
constructed on public or private property or will not
otherwise interfere with pedestrian access.
Awnings, marquees and balconies. The SPGA may provide
relief from the zero front yard setback for awnings, marquees
and balconies. These building structures are allowed to
protrude up to five feet past the property line into the public
right-of-way. All awnings, marquees and open air balconies
shall require a license from the Town Manager consistent with
Barnstable General Ordinances, Part 1, Chapter 121, § 121-6J.
Awnings and Marquees
Open Air Balconies
(b)
Height.
Maximum building height.
The maximum height of buildings or structures, other than
accessory rooftop equipment discussed below or special
architectural features, is 42 feet or three stories not to
exceed 46 feet.
[1]
Maximum height may be increased to 46 feet or three
stories when the roof pitch is in the range of six in 12.
[2]
In order to reduce shadows on Hyannis Main Street, for
lots located on the southerly edge of the layout of Hyannis
Main Street between Barnstable Road/Ocean Street and
Sea Street, the maximum building height within 25 feet of
the layout of Hyannis Main Street shall not exceed 35 feet
unless a special permit is obtained from the SPGA. (See
Diagram No. 3 below.)
[3]
(a)
(2)
§ 240-24.1.3 WASTEWATER DISCHARGE § 240-24.1.3
232:373
Height of rooftop equipment. Accessory rooftop equipment
may extend to 46 feet {or to 50 feet when the building height is
allowed at 46 feet under Subsection [(2)(a)[2] above}, provided
that it is set back from the exterior wall(s) by at least 10 feet,
and is enclosed or screened with materials compatible with the
building, and the headhouse and screening are not visible from
the ground. Accessory equipment shall not exceed 20% of the
roof area. Eight-foot tall roof headhouse structures shall be set
back from the exterior wall(s) by at least 10 feet, and shall not
exceed 20% of the roof area.
(b)
Facade length. Buildings or portions of a building with a mass
over 50 feet wide must divide their elevations into smaller parts. A
pronounced change in massing, pronounced changes in wall planes
and introducing significant variations in the cornice/roofline are all
possible methods to accomplish the desired divisions of elevations
into smaller parts.
(3)
Roof pitch. Flat roofs shall not extend for more than 50 linear feet,
unless otherwise permitted by special permit.
(4)
Building entrances and alleyways.
For lots which have at least 10 feet of frontage on Hyannis
Main Street, development and redevelopment shall include
building facades that front on and have a principal pedestrian
entrance on Hyannis Main Street.
(a)
(5)
§ 240-24.1.3 BARNSTABLE CODE § 240-24.1.3
232:374
The construction of any new buildings shall provide for the
creation of pedestrian alleyways, where appropriate, in order
to allow for passageways to parking at the rear of the lots and
adjoining streets.
(b)
Ground floor windows.
All new nonresidential development shall provide ground floor
windows along street facades, including windows that allow
views into working areas or lobbies, pedestrian entrances, or
display windows. Required windows shall have a sill no more
than four feet above grade. Where interior floor levels prohibit
such placement, the sill may be raised to no more than two feet
above the finished floor level, up to a maximum sill height of
six feet above grade.
(a)
Windows that block two-way visibility, such as darkly tinted
and mirrored windows, are prohibited as ground floor windows
along street facades.
(b)
Any wall which is within 30 feet of the street shall contain at
least 20% of the ground floor wall area facing the street in
display areas, windows, or doorways. Blank walls, including
walls that do not include display areas, windows, architectural
features, and/or doorways, are prohibited.
(c)
(6)
Through lots.
Through lots defined. A "through lot" shall be a lot with a
lot line of at least 10 feet on Hyannis Main Street that also
abuts on another public street or way (the "alternative street
or way"), but shall not include a corner lot. A through lot with
at least 10 feet of property line abutting Hyannis Main Street
is presumed to have frontage on Hyannis Main Street.
(a)
For through lots, the lot shall provide vehicular access off of
the alternative street or way unless otherwise permitted by
special permit.
(b)
(7)
Curb cuts and driveways.
New curb cuts on Hyannis Main Street shall only be allowed
where the curb cut leads to parking for at least 21 vehicles.
No more than one curb cut on Hyannis Main Street shall be
allowed for any lot. For traffic safety and to maintain traffic
flow, no new driveways shall be permitted on Hyannis Main
Street within 200 feet of any intersection.
(a)
Driveways shall not occupy more than 25% of the frontage of
any parcel, except for lots less than 40 feet wide.
(b)
(8)
§ 240-24.1.3 WASTEWATER DISCHARGE § 240-24.1.3
232:375
Site development standards. In addition to the site development
standards set forth in § 240-24.1.10 below, the following requirements
shall apply.
(1) Loading docks. Loading docks shall not be visible from Main Street.
Parking spaces, computation.
The parking standards contained within the Schedule of Off-
Street Parking Requirement, § 240-56 of the Barnstable Zoning
Ordinance, shall establish the minimum parking requirements,
with the following exceptions:
The use of shared parking for different uses having
different peak hours of demand will be considered in
evaluating compliance with § 240-56. A signed lease
agreement between relevant parties sharing parking must
be provided as part of the site plan approval or special
permit process.
[1]
A permitted use can be changed to another permitted
use, and any permitted principal or accessory use can
be intensified, without increasing the required off-street
parking requirements of § 240-56, Schedule of Off-Street
Parking Requirements, provided that as of July 14, 2005:
There is no increase in gross square footage of the
building; and
[a]
There is no reduction in existing parking spaces
required pursuant to § 240-56; and
[b]
There is no added outdoor use requiring the provision
of parking according to Section 204-56, except that no
parking spaces shall be required for outdoor dining on
both public and private property; and
[c]
Parking space requirements for residential dwelling
units shall be one parking space per bedroom for
one- and two-bedroom units or a total of two parking
spaces for units with two or more bedrooms.
[d]
[2]
(a)
(2)
Parking spaces shall be provided for new and/or expanded building
area, and for new and/or expanded outdoor uses, as follows:
Fifty percent of the spaces required under § 240-56 for all uses
other than office uses and residential dwelling units.
(a)
Parking space requirements for residential dwelling units shall
be one parking space per bedroom for one- and two-bedroom
units or a total of two parking spaces for units with two or more
bedrooms.
(b)
(3)
D.
§ 240-24.1.3 BARNSTABLE CODE § 240-24.1.3
232:376
§ 240-24.1.4. MS Medical Services District. [Added 7-14-2005 by
Order No. 2005-100]
The SPGA may, by special permit, further reduce the parking
required as follows:
Off-site parking. Parking requirements may be satisfied if an
off-street municipal parking lot of 20 spaces or more exists
within 500 feet of the proposed use and provided that a fee
is paid which would be set aside for the creation of future
municipal parking facilities to service the district, consistent
with a schedule of fees, if any, to be adopted in the Design and
Infrastructure Plan. Off-site parking may also be provided on
a private parking lot with sufficient parking spaces within 300
feet of the proposed use, provided that a lease agreement is
presented as part of the site plan approval or special permit
process and provided that a fee is paid which would be set
aside for the creation of future municipal parking facilities to
service the district, consistent with a schedule of fees, if any,
to be adopted in the Design and Infrastructure Plan. In no case
shall leased parking be allowed on land that is residentially
zoned for, or in residential use as, a single-family or a twofamily
dwelling.
(a)
The SPGA may reduce the on-site and off-street parking
requirement for all uses except office uses and residential
uses, based upon a consideration of:
[1] Availability of shared parking.
Other factors supporting the reduction in the number of
required parking spaces.
[2]
(b)
(4)
Landscaping.
Front yard landscape is not required if front setback is zero.
When the front setback is greater than zero, those portions of
the front yard not occupied by pedestrian amenities and public
spaces shall be landscaped.
(a)
Street trees are required consistent with § 240-24.1.10 below
if front setback is greater than zero feet.
(b)
(5)
Lighting.
All developments shall use full cutoff light fixtures for exterior
lighting in which no more than 2.5% of the total output is
emitted at 90° from the vertical pole or building wall on which
it is mounted.
(a)
(b) Flood-, area and up-lighting is not permitted.
(6)
§ 240-24.1.3 WASTEWATER DISCHARGE § 240-24.1.4
232:377
Permitted uses. The following principal and accessory uses are
permitted in the MS District. Uses not expressly allowed are prohibited.
Permitted principal uses.
(a) Single-family dwellings.
(b) Two-family dwellings.
(c) Business and professional offices.
(d) Nursing homes.
(e) Medical/dental clinics.
(f) Hospitals (nonveterinarian).
(g) Bed-and-breakfasts.
Multifamily housing totaling not more than six dwelling units
per acre or 12 bedrooms per acre.
(h)
(i) Mixed-use development.
(1)
Permitted accessory uses.
(a) Family apartments.
The following uses shall only be permitted as ancillary
operations to a hospital, nursing home, or other medicaloriented
facility:
[1] Personal services, such as barber or beauty shops.
[2] Banking services.
[3] Restaurants.
[4] Pharmacies.
(b)
(2)
A.
Special permits.
Permitted principal uses as follows, provided, however, that a
special permit shall not be required when the applicant has
obtained a development of regional impact approval, exemption or
hardship exemption from the Cape Cod Commission:
Nonresidential development, including nursing homes, with a
total floor area greater than 10,000 square feet.
(a)
Mixed use developments with a total floor area greater than
20,000 square feet or greater than 10,000 square feet of
commercial space.
(b)
(1)
Multifamily housing proposing to create seven or more dwelling
units per acre or 13 or more bedrooms per acre and including
(2)
B.
§ 240-24.1.4 BARNSTABLE CODE § 240-24.1.4
232:378
at least 25% of workforce housing and totaling not more than
12 units per acre. Multifamily housing in the MS District is not
required to provide inclusionary housing pursuant to Chapter 9 of
the Barnstable Code.
Registered recreational marijuana cultivators, research facilities
and independent testing laboratories, subject to compliance with
the provisions of Article XII herein. [Added 9-6-2018 by Order
No. 2019-015]
(3)
Dimensional, bulk and other requirements. (NOTE: For hospital uses:
the maximum building height provisions set forth in the table below
may be extended to no more than 85 feet or a maximum of six stories
not to exceed 85 feet; and, the maximum lot coverage requirements set
forth below shall not apply.)
Minimum Yard
Setbacks
Maximum
Building
Height1
Zoning
District
Minimum
Lot Area
(square
feet)
Minimum
Lot
Frontage
(feet)
Front
(feet)
Rear
(feet)
Side
(feet) Feet Stories1
Maximum
Lot
Coverage2 FAR3
Medical
Services
10,000 50 202 102 102 38 3 80% —
NOTES:
1 The third story can only occur within habitable attic space.
2 See also setbacks in Subsection C(1) below.
Setbacks.
(a) The front yard landscaped setback shall be 10 feet.
The SPGA may reduce to zero the rear and side setbacks for
buildings to accommodate shared access driveways or parking
lots that service buildings located on two or more adjoining
lots.
(b)
(1)
Site access/curb cuts.
Driveways on Route 28 shall be minimized. Access shall not
be located on Route 28 where safe vehicular and pedestrian
access can be provided on an alternative roadway, or via a
shared driveway, or via a driveway interconnection. On Route
28, new vehicular access, new development, redevelopment
and changes in use that increase vehicle trips per day and/or
increase peak hour roadway use shall be by special permit.
(a)
(2)
C.
§ 240-24.1.4 WASTEWATER DISCHARGE § 240-24.1.4
232:379
§ 240-24.1.5. SF Single Family Residential District. [Added
7-14-2005 by Order No. 2005-100]
Applicants seeking a new curb cut on Route 28 shall consult
the Town Director/Superintendent of Public Works regarding
access on state highway roadways prior to seeking a curbcut
permit from the Massachusetts Highway Department, and
work with the Town and other authorizing agencies, such as
the MHD, to agree on an overall access plan for the site prior to
site approval. The applicant shall provide proof of consultation
with the listed entities and other necessary parties.
(b)
All driveways and changes to driveways on Route 28 shall:
Provide the minimum number of driveways for the size and
type of land use proposed;
[1]
Provide shared access with adjacent development where
feasible; and
[2]
Provide a driveway interconnection between adjacent
parcels to avoid short trips and conflicts on the main road.
[3]
(c)
Site development standards. In addition to the site development
standards set forth in § 240-24.1.10 below, the following requirement
shall apply:
Landscaping for multifamily housing. A perimeter green space of
not less than 10 feet in width shall be provided, such space to be
planted and maintained as green area and to be broken only in a
front yard by a driveway and/or entry walk.
(1)
D.
Permitted uses. The following principal and accessory uses are
permitted in the SF District. Uses not expressly allowed are prohibited.
Permitted principal uses.
(a) Single-family dwellings (detached).
(b) Bed-and-breakfasts.
(c) Artists lofts.
For those lots with frontage on South Street and/or High
School Road, professional offices.
(d)
Renting of rooms for not more than three nonfamily members
by the family residing in a single-family dwelling. [Added
6-1-2006 by Order No. 2006-136]
(e)
(1)
Permitted accessory uses.
(a) Family apartments.
(2)
A.
§ 240-24.1.4 BARNSTABLE CODE § 240-24.1.5
232:380
Dimensional, bulk and other requirements.
Minimum Yard
Setbacks
Maximum
Building
Height1
Zoning
District
Minimum
Lot
Area1
(square
feet)
Minimum
Lot
Frontage1
(feet)
Minimum
Lot
Width2
(feet)
Front
(feet)
Rear
(feet)
Side
(feet) Feet Stories1
Maximum
Lot
Coverage2FAR3
Single
Family
Residential
20,000 20 100 203 103 103 38 3 — —
NOTES:
1 The minimum lot area shall be reduced to 10,000 square feet and/or the minimum lot frontage
shall be reduced to 50 feet if an existing nonresidential use, in existence as of the effective
date of this section, is changed to a single-family residential use.
2 Lot width at front building setback
3 See also setbacks in Subsection C(1) and corner lot setback in Subsection C(2) below.
4 The third story in a single-family or two-family dwelling can only occur within habitable attic
space.
Setbacks. A perimeter green space of not less than 10 feet in width
shall be provided, such space to be planted and maintained as
green area and to be broken only in a front yard by a driveway.
(1)
Corner lot setback. Corner lots shall comply with the provisions of
§ 240-41 of the Barnstable Zoning Ordinance.
(2)
B.
Site development standard. Single-family dwellings are encouraged to
comply with the provisions of Article IX, § 240-103, Site development
standards. Single-family dwellings are not required to comply with
§ 240-24.1.10 below, and they are not required to obtain site plan
approval. Single-family dwellings shall comply with the following
requirements:
Parking and signage. All development within the SF District shall
comply with applicable parking and signage requirements
contained in Article VI, §§ 240-48 through 240-58, and Article VII,
§§ 240-59 through 240-89, inclusive, of the Barnstable Zoning
Ordinance.
(1)
Lighting. Reflectors and shielding shall provide total cutoff of all
light at the property lines of the parcel to be developed.
(2)
C.
§ 240-24.1.5 WASTEWATER DISCHARGE § 240-24.1.5
232:381
§ 240-24.1.6. OM Office/Multifamily Residential District. [Added
7-14-2005 by Order No. 2005-100]
Fences. No fence shall exceed a height of 6 1/2 feet (eight feet
when abutting a nonresidential district) unless a special permit is
obtained from the SPGA.
(3)
Permitted uses. The following principal and accessory uses are
permitted in the OM District. Uses not expressly allowed are
prohibited.
Permitted principal uses.
(a) Business and professional offices.
(b) Personal services establishments.
(c) Repair services.
(d) Publishing and printing establishments.
(e) Packaging and delivery services.
(f) Artist's lofts.
(g) Restaurants.
Multifamily housing, including but not limited to townhouses,
totaling not more than 12 dwelling units, or 24 bedrooms per
acre.
(h)
(i) Mixed-use development.
Office, dental or medical. [Added 3-18-2010 by Order No.
2010-069]
(j)
(1)
Permitted accessory uses.
(a) Health clubs.
Retail uses directly related to a principal permitted use that
does not exceed 1,500 square feet.
(b)
(2)
A.
Special permits.
Permitted principal uses as follows; provided, however, that a
special permit shall not be required when the applicant has
obtained a development of regional impact approval, exemption or
hardship exemption from the Cape Cod Commission.
Nonresidential development with a total floor area greater
than 10,000 square feet;
(a)
(1)
B.
§ 240-24.1.5 BARNSTABLE CODE § 240-24.1.6
232:382
Mixed use developments with a total floor area greater than
20,000 square feet or greater than 10,000 square feet of
commercial space.
(b)
Multifamily housing, including at least 25% workforce housing and
totaling not more than 16 dwelling units or 32 bedrooms per acre.
(2)
Dimensional, bulk and other requirements.
Minimum Yard
Setbacks
Maximum
Building
Height1
Zoning
District
Minimum
Lot Area
(square
feet)
Minimum
Lot
Frontage
(feet)
Front
(feet)
Rear
(feet)
Side
(feet) Feet Stories2
Maximum
Lot
Coverage2 FAR3
Office/
Multifamily
Residential
20,000 50 201 101 101 40 3 80% 1.0
NOTES:
1 See also setbacks in Subsection C(1) below.
Setbacks.
The front yard landscaped setback shall be 10 feet, with the
exception of townhouse development.
(a)
The SPGA may reduce to zero the rear and side setbacks for
buildings to accommodate shared access driveways or parking
lots that service buildings located on two or more adjoining
lots.
(b)
For townhouses, buildings shall be set back zero to 15 feet
from the frontage line. Buildings at street intersections shall
be set back at least six feet but not more than 15 feet from the
frontage line and side street lines. Setback requirements shall
apply to the enclosed portion of the buildings only. That area
between the building setback (including decks and unenclosed
structures) and the street line shall be landscaped.
(c)
For townhouses with direct vehicular access from the street,
garage and carport entrances shall not be closer to the street
property line than any other portion of the front facade of the
building.
(d)
(1)
C.
Site development standards. For additional site plan review and special
permit standards see § 240-24.1.10 below.
D.
§ 240-24.1.6 WASTEWATER DISCHARGE § 240-24.1.7
232:383
§ 240-24.1.7. HD Harbor District. [Added 7-14-2005 by Order No.
2005-100]
Permitted uses. The following principal and accessory uses are
permitted in the HD District. Uses not expressly allowed are prohibited.
Permitted principal uses.
(a) Marinas.
(b) Building, sale, rental, storage and repair of boats.
(c) Retail sale of marine fishing and boating supplies.
(d) Retail sale of fishing bait, fish and shellfish.
Commercial fishing, not including canning or processing of
fish.
(e)
Charter fishing and marine sightseeing and excursion
facilities.
(f)
(g) Museums.
(h) Performing arts facilities.
(i) Restaurants.
(j) Hotels.
(k) Motels.
(l) Conference centers.
(m) Bed-and-breakfasts.
(n) Artist's lofts.
Mixed-use development with all residential units located above
the ground floor only.
(o)
(1)
Permitted accessory uses.
Offices to be used for ancillary activities which are directly
related to a principal permitted use in the district.
(a)
Accessory retail uses that do not exceed 1,500 square feet and
which are directly related to a principal permitted use in the
district.
(b)
Health club not exceeding 1,500 square feet and which is
directly related to a principal permitted use in the district.
(c)
(2)
A.
B. Special permits.
§ 240-24.1.7 BARNSTABLE CODE § 240-24.1.7
232:384
§ 240-24.1.8. HG Hyannis Gateway District. [Added 7-14-2005 by
Order No. 2005-100]
Permitted principal uses as follows, provided, however, that a
special permit shall not be required when the applicant has
obtained a development of regional impact approval, exemption or
hardship exemption from the Cape Cod Commission:
Nonresidential development with a total floor area greater
than 10,000 square feet;
(a)
Mixed use developments with a total floor area greater than
20,000 square feet or greater than 10,000 square feet of
commercial space.
(b)
(1)
Multifamily residential development totaling not more than seven
units per acre.
(2)
Dimensional, bulk and other requirements.
Minimum Yard
Setbacks
Maximum
Building
Height1
Zoning
District
Minimum
Lot Area
(square
feet)
Minimum
Lot
Frontage
(feet)
Front
(feet)
Rear
(feet)
Side
(feet) Feet Stories
Maximum
Lot
Coverage1 FAR
Harbor
District
20,000 20 202 102 102 35 2.53 70% —
NOTES:
1 See additional dimensional regulations for marine uses in Subsection C(1) below.
2 See also setbacks in Subsection C(2) below.
3 The half story can only occur within habitable attic space.
Special dimensional regulations for marine uses. In order to
support water-dependent uses on the harbor, for buildings and
structures used as a marina and/or used in the building, sale,
rental, storage and/or repair of boats, so long as such buildings or
structures exist as of the date of the adoption of this section, the
following dimensional regulations shall apply: maximum building
height 45 feet, maximum lot coverage 90%.
(1)
(2) Setbacks. The front yard landscaped setback shall be 10 feet.
C.
Site development standards. For additional site plan review and special
permit standards, see § 240-24.1.10 below.
D.
§ 240-24.1.7 WASTEWATER DISCHARGE § 240-24.1.8
232:385
Permitted uses. The following principal and accessory uses are
permitted in the HG District. Uses not expressly allowed are prohibited.
Permitted principal uses.
(a) Business and professional offices.
(b) Banks.
(c) Restaurants.
(d) Business support services not exceeding 5,000 square feet.
Dental and medical clinics, including a change of use, that do
not increase the number of vehicle trips per day and do not
increase peak hour vehicle trips per day.
(e)
Retail uses that do not increase the number of vehicle trips per
day and do not increase peak hour vehicle trips per day.
(f)
(g) Mixed-use development.
Multifamily housing totaling not more than four dwelling units
per acre, or eight bedrooms per acre.
(h)
(1)
Permitted accessory uses.
Accessory retail uses that do not exceed 1,500 square feet and
which are directly related to a principal permitted use in the
district.
(a)
(b) Personal services establishments.
(c) Automated banking facilities (ATM).
(2)
A.
Special permits.
Permitted principal uses as follows, provided, however, that a
special permit shall not be required when the applicant has
obtained a development of regional impact approval, exemption or
hardship exemption from the Cape Cod Commission:
Nonresidential development with a total floor area greater
than 10,000 square feet.
(a)
Mixed use developments with a total floor area greater than
20,000 square feet or greater than 10,000 square feet of
commercial space.
(b)
(1)
Multifamily housing, including workforce housing totaling not more
than 16 dwelling units or 32 bedrooms per acre, that includes at
least 25% of workforce housing dwelling units.
(2)
B.
§ 240-24.1.8 BARNSTABLE CODE § 240-24.1.8
232:386
Retail uses and dental and medical clinics that increase the number
of vehicle trips per day and/or increase peak hour vehicle trips per
day.
(3)
Dimensional, bulk and other requirements.
Minimum Yard Setbacks
Maximum
Building
Height1
Zoning
District
Minimum
Lot Area
(square
feet)
Minimum
Lot
Frontage
(feet)
Front
(feet)
Rear
(feet)
Side
(feet) Feet Stories
Maximum
Lot
Coverage2 FAR3
Hyannis
Gateway
40,000 50 303 15 20 40 3 80% 0.8
NOTES:
1 Floor area ratio = gross building square footage divided by the lot area.
2 The third story can only occur within habitable attic space.
3 See also setbacks in Subsection C(1) below.
Setback. Front yard landscape setback on Route 28 is 60 feet.
For lots with less than 20,000 square feet of lot area, front yard
landscape setback shall be at least 10 feet.
(1)
Site access/curb cuts.
Driveways on Route 28 and Barnstable Road shall be
minimized. Access shall not be located on Route 28 or
Barnstable Road where safe vehicular and pedestrian access
can be provided on an alternative roadway, or via a shared
driveway, or via a driveway interconnection. On Route 28, new
vehicular access, and changes in use that increase vehicle trips
per day and/or peak hour roadway use for an existing driveway
or curb cut, shall be by special permit.
(a)
Applicants seeking a new curb cut on Route 28 shall consult
the Town Director of Public Works regarding access on state
highway roadways prior to seeking a curb cut permit from the
Massachusetts Highway Department, and work with the Town
and other authorizing agencies such as the MHD to agree on
an overall access plan for the site prior to site approval. The
applicant shall provide proof of consultation with the listed
entities and other necessary parties.
(b)
All driveways and changes to driveways shall:
Provide the minimum number of driveways for the size and
type of land use proposed.
[1]
(c)
(2)
C.
§ 240-24.1.8 WASTEWATER DISCHARGE § 240-24.1.8
232:387
§ 240-24.1.9. Transportation Hub District. [Added 7-14-2005 by
Order No. 2005-100]
Provide shared access with adjacent development where
feasible.
[2]
Provide a driveway interconnection between adjacent
parcels to avoid short trips and conflicts on the main road.
[3]
Parking at the front of the lot is strongly discouraged. When
parking is allowed on the front of the lot, where feasible, it
shall be limited to a single row of vehicles and associated
turning space. Also within the HG District, to the extent
feasible, existing parking located on the front of the lot shall
be removed and relocated to the rear and/or side of buildings,
consistent with this section.
(d)
Transit improvement incentives. For redevelopment, the SPGA
may provide relief from required parking where the applicant:
Permanently eliminates and/or significantly reduces the
width of existing curb cuts in a manner that improves the
through flow of traffic on Barnstable Road and/or Route
28; and/or
[1]
Provides a perpetual agreement for one or more driveway
interconnections that will alleviate traffic on Barnstable
Road and/or Route 28.
[2]
(e)
Site development standards. In addition to the site development
standards set forth in § 240-24.1.10 below, the following requirements
shall apply.
Landscaping. All site plan and special permit applications shall
include a landscaping plan which shall be signed and stamped by a
Massachusetts certified landscape architect.
(1)
D.
Permitted uses. The following principal and accessory uses are
permitted in the TD District. Uses not expressly allowed are prohibited.
Permitted principal uses.
(a) Restaurants.
(b) Tourist information service.
(c) Parking facilities outside of the WP Overlay District.
(d) Bicycle rental services (nonmotorized vehicles only).
(e) Shuttle services.
(f) Alternative transportation facilities.
(1)
A.
§ 240-24.1.8 BARNSTABLE CODE § 240-24.1.9
232:388
(g) Car rental services outside of the WP Overlay District.
(h) Automated banking facilities (ATM).
Permitted accessory uses. Accessory retail uses that do not exceed
1,500 square feet and which are directly related to a principal
permitted use in the TD District.
(2)
Special permits.
(1) Parking facilities within the WP Overlay District.
(2) Public transportation maintenance facilities.
(3) Car rental services within the WP Overlay District.
Permitted principal uses as follows, provided, however, that a
special permit shall not be required when the applicant has
obtained a development of regional impact approval, exemption or
hardship exemption from the Cape Cod Commission:
Nonresidential development with a total floor area greater
than 10,000 square feet.
(a)
(4)
B.
Dimensional, bulk and other requirements.
Minimum Yard
Setbacks
Maximum
Building
Height
Zoning
District
Minimum
Lot Area
(square
feet)
Minimum
Lot
Frontage
(feet)
Front
(feet)
Rear
(feet)
Side
(feet) Feet Stories2
Maximum
Lot
Coverage1 FAR
Transportation
Hub
30,000 100 203 103 103 40 3 25% —
NOTES:
1 Maximum lot coverage pertains to building footprint only, with the exception of parking
facilities which are permitted a maximum lot coverage of 65%.
2 The third story can only occur within habitable attic space.
3 See also setbacks in Subsection C(1) below.
Setbacks.
(a) Front setback on Route 28 is 50 feet.
The SPGA may reduce to zero the rear and side setbacks for
buildings to accommodate shared access driveways or parking
lots that service buildings located on two or more adjoining
lots.
(b)
(1)
C.
§ 240-24.1.9 WASTEWATER DISCHARGE § 240-24.1.9
232:389
Site access/curb cuts.
Driveways on Route 28 shall be minimized. Access shall not
be located on Route 28 where safe vehicular and pedestrian
access can be provided on an alternative roadway, via a shared
driveway, or via a driveway interconnection. On Route 28, new
vehicular access, and changes in use that increase vehicle trips
per day and/or peak hour roadway use for an existing driveway
or curb cut, shall be by special permit.
(a)
Upon the redevelopment, expansion, alteration or change of
use of any lot with a lot line on Engine House Road, the
new, expanded, altered or changed use shall provide vehicular
access solely on Engine House Road.
(b)
Applicants seeking a new curb cut on Route 28 shall consult
the Town Director of Public Works regarding access on state
highway roadways prior to seeking a curb cut permit from the
Massachusetts Highway Department, and work with the Town
and other authorizing agencies such as the MHD to agree on
an overall access plan for the site prior to site approval. The
applicant shall provide proof of consultation with the listed
entities and other necessary parties.
(c)
Parking at the front of the lot is strongly discouraged. When
parking is allowed on the front of the lot, where feasible, it
shall be limited to a single row of vehicles and associated
turning space. Also within the TD District, to the extent
feasible, for redevelopment, existing parking located on the
front of the lot shall be removed and relocated to the rear and/
or side of buildings, consistent with this section.
(d)
All driveways and changes to driveways shall:
Provide the minimum number of driveways for the size and
type of land use proposed;
[1]
Provide shared access with adjacent development where
feasible;
[2]
Provide a driveway interconnection between adjacent
parcels to avoid short trips and conflicts on the main road.
[3]
(e)
Transit improvement incentives. For redevelopment, the SPGA
may provide relief from required parking where the applicant:
Permanently eliminates and/or significantly reduces the
width of existing curb cuts in a manner that improves the
through flow of traffic on Barnstable Road and/or Route
28; and/or
[1]
(f)
(2)
§ 240-24.1.9 BARNSTABLE CODE § 240-24.1.9
232:390
§ 240-24.1.9.1. GM Gateway Medical District. [Added 4-27-2017 by
Order No. 2017-100]
Provides a perpetual agreement for one or more driveway
interconnections that will alleviate traffic on Barnstable
Road and/or Route 28.
[2]
Site development standards. In addition to the site development
standards set forth in § 240-24.1.10 below, the following requirements
shall apply.
Special permit criteria. In determining whether to grant a special
permit within the WP Overlay District, the SPGA shall consider the
criteria set forth in § 240-24.1.2, General provisions, Subsection E,
above, in addition to the following factors:
The nature and extent of the risk of contamination to the
proposed well that will result from the grant of the special
permit;
(a)
The nature and degree to which the proposal eliminates
existing threats to the public water supply, including on-site
and off-site mitigation;
(b)
The overall effectiveness of existing land uses and/or
protective measures on the public water supply well; and
(c)
Whether granting the special permit will accommodate an
overriding community interest.
(d)
(1)
D.
Permitted uses. The following principal and accessory uses are
permitted in the GM District. Uses not expressly allowed are
prohibited.
Permitted principal uses.
(a) Business and professional offices.
(b) Banks.
(c) Restaurants.
(d) Business support services.
(e) Dental and medical clinics.
(f) Retail uses.
(g) Personal services.
(h) Mixed-use development.
Multifamily housing totaling not more than six dwelling units
per acre or 12 bedrooms per acre.
(i)
(1)
A.
§ 240-24.1.9 WASTEWATER DISCHARGE § 240-24.1.9.1
232:391
Permitted accessory uses.
(a) Automated banking facilities (ATM).
(2)
Special permits.
Permitted principal uses as follows:
Nonresidential development with a total floor area greater
than 10,000 square feet.
(a)
Mixed-use developments with a total floor area greater than
20,000 square feet or greater than 10,000 square feet of
commercial space.
(b)
Multifamily housing proposing to create seven or more
dwelling units per acre or 13 or more bedrooms per acre
and including at least 25% of workforce housing and totaling
not more than 12 units per acre. Multifamily housing in the
GM District is not required to provide inclusionary housing
pursuant to Chapter 9 of the Barnstable Code.
(c)
(1)
Registered recreational marijuana cultivators, research facilities
and independent testing laboratories, subject to compliance with
the provisions of Article XII herein. [Added 9-6-2018 by Order
No. 2019-015]
(2)
B.
Dimensional, bulk and other requirements.
Minimum Yard Setbacks Maximum Building Height
Zoning
District
Minimum
Lot
Area
(square
feet)
Minimum
Lot
Frontage
(feet)
Front
(feet)
Rear
(feet)
Side
(feet) Feet Stories
Maximum
Lot
Coverage FAR
Gateway
Medical
Services
10,000 50 201 10 20 38 3 80% -
NOTES:
1 See also setbacks in Subsection C(1) below.
Setbacks. Front yard landscape setback on Route 28 is 60 feet.
For lots with less than 10,000 square feet of lot area, front yard
landscape setback on Route 28 shall be 10 feet.
(1)
Site access/curb cuts.
Driveways on Route 28 shall be minimized. Access shall not
be located on Route 28 where safe vehicular and pedestrian
(a)
(2)
C.
§ 240-24.1.9.1 BARNSTABLE CODE § 240-24.1.9.1
232:392
§ 240-24.1.10. Hyannis Parking Overlay District (HPOD). [Added
7-21-2016 by Order No. 2016-16654]
access can be provided on an alternative roadway, or via a
shared driveway, or via a driveway interconnection.
Applicants seeking a new curb cut on Route 28 shall consult
the Town Director of Public Works regarding access prior to
seeking an application for a permit to access a state highway
from the Massachusetts Department of Transportation, and
work with the Town and other authorizing agencies such as
MassDOT on a site access plan prior to site plan approval.
The applicant shall provide proof of consultation with the listed
entities and other necessary parties.
(b)
All driveways and changes to driveways shall:
Provide the minimum number of driveways for the size and
type of land use proposed.
[1]
Provide shared access with adjacent development where
feasible.
[2]
Provide a driveway interconnection between adjacent
parcels to avoid short trips and conflicts on the main road
where feasible.
[3]
(c)
Parking at the front of the lot is strongly discouraged. When
parking is allowed on the front of the lot, where feasible, it
shall be limited to a single row of vehicles and associated
turning space. To the extent feasible, existing parking located
on the front of the lot shall be removed and relocated to the
rear and/or side of buildings, consistent with this section.
(d)
The SPGA may provide relief from required parking where the
applicant:
Permanently eliminates and/or significantly reduces the
width of existing curb cuts in a manner that improves the
through flow of traffic on Route 28; and/or
[1]
Provides an agreement for one or more driveway
interconnections that will alleviate traffic on Route 28.
[2]
[3] Has the availability of shared parking.
(e)
Site development standards. Site development standards set forth in
§ 240-24.1.10 shall apply.
Landscaping for multifamily housing. A perimeter green space of
not less than 10 feet in width shall be provided, such space to be
planted and maintained as green area and to be broken only in a
front yard by a driveway and/or entry walk.
(1)
D.
§ 240-24.1.9.1 WASTEWATER DISCHARGE § 240-24.1.10
232:393
Purposes and intent. This section allows as-of-right permitting for land
located south of Main Street in Hyannis, which land has some legal preexisting
nonconforming status or was licensed as of May 1, 2014, as an
open air parking lot involving the temporary storage of vehicles. The
scope of such uses would otherwise have to be clarified through a quasijudicial
or regulatory process. The purpose of this section is to:
Clarify this land use and create as of right permitting for land now
used as open air parking lots and located south of Main Street in
Hyannis;
(1)
Protect the safety of the users of the lot and the general public
through site development standards providing constant access for
emergency responders;
(2)
(3) Ensure safe access to structures for emergency responders;
Protect adjacent property from nuisances which may result from
the operation of cars and parking off streets;
(4)
(5) Enhance and protect the visual quality of the Hyannis harbor area;
Reduce congestion on lot access streets which also serve
residential areas; and
(6)
Contribute to traffic safety by ensuring orderly access to and
egress from such lots.
(7)
A.
Relationship to underlying districts and regulations.
The Hyannis Parking Overlay District (HPOD) shall overlay all
underlying districts so that any parcel of land lying in the HPOD
shall also lie in the zoning district or districts in which it is
otherwise classified by this chapter.
(1)
All regulations of the underlying zoning district(s) shall apply
within the HPOD to the extent that they are not inconsistent with
the specific provisions of this § 240-24.1.10. To the extent the
provisions of this § 240-24.1.10 are in conflict with or are
inconsistent with other provisions of this chapter, the provisions
of this § 240-24.1.10 shall govern and prevail even if such other
provisions are more restrictive than those set forth in this section
240-24.1.10.
(2)
B.
Definitions.
As used in this section, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AISLE — That portion of the commercial surface parking lot circulation
area providing safe and constant access for emergency responders
C.
54.Editor's Note: This order also provided for the renumbering of former §§ 240-24.1.10
through 240-24.1.12 as §§ 240-24.1.11 through 240-24.1.13, respectively.
§ 240-24.1.10 BARNSTABLE CODE § 240-24.1.10
232:394
and access to parking spaces for lot patrons. Aisle area is calculated
exclusive of any other area on the lot, such as driveway, parking stalls,
and attendant areas.
COMMERCIAL SURFACE PARKING LOT — The commercial parking of
vehicles where parking is a principal use on the property. Commercial
surface parking lots shall not include structures, fully or partially
enclosed, that accommodate vehicle parking spaces. Noncommercial
trucks, vans and other vehicles not exceeding 7.5 feet may use a
commercial surface parking lot.
EMERGENCY ACCESS AISLES AND FIRE LANES — Aisles,
unobstructed at all times, for the safe and immediate access of
emergency response vehicles. At no time shall any portion of a
designated emergency access aisle be used for parking or storing
vehicles for any length of time no matter how short.
KIOSK — A structure, which may be temporary or seasonal, located on
the commercial surface parking lot from which parking transactions are
conducted.
PARKING ATTENDANT — An employee of the commercial surface
parking lot available to customers to park and retrieve vehicles within
the licensed lot.
REMOTE PARKING SITES — Sites accommodating excess parking for
HPOD parking lots that are located in another area of Hyannis where
such parking use is allowed. Such remote parking lots shall be
permitted and licensed only in connection with the HPOD parking lot.
SECOND PRINCIPAL USE — A second principal use, lawfully permitted
and established at the time of the adoption of this section, may share a
parcel with a commercial surface parking lot.
STACKED PARKING — Parking of vehicles in a line or stack that may
be up to three vehicles deep at a commercial surface parking lot. The
lot operator shall have an attendant present to move vehicles out of
the stack at all times that the lot is open for vehicle pickup by vehicle
owners.
Permitted uses.
Principal uses.
Commercial surface parking lot
(1)
D.
Site development standards.
Access management.
Entrance and exit driveways shall be a minimum of 14 feet
wide for one-way use only and a minimum of 20 feet wide for
two-way use and shall be delineated.
(a)
(1)
E.
§ 240-24.1.10 WASTEWATER DISCHARGE § 240-24.1.10
232:395
Driveways shall be located so as to minimize conflict with
traffic on public streets and where good visibility and sight
distances are available to observe approaching pedestrian and
vehicular traffic.
(b)
Parking spaces.
Computation.
Within the property boundaries the number of parking
spaces is limited only by the required dimensions for
parking spaces, aisles, emergency access aisles, and fire
lanes.
[1]
Where another principal use, lawfully permitted and
established at the time of the adoption of this section,
is located on the same parcel as the commercial surface
parking lot, the number of parking spaces required to
support that use shall be deducted from the number of
spaces for the commercial surface parking lot use;
provided that the number of commercial surface parking
spaces shall not exceed the number determined as of the
effective date of this section, even if any other principal
use is subsequently discontinued.
[2]
Where another principal use not located on the same
parcel as the commercial surface parking lot uses some of
the lot's spaces as shared parking for the off lot use, those
spaces shall be deducted from the zoning and licensing
number of spaces for the commercial surface parking lot;
provided that the number of commercial surface parking
spaces shall not exceed the number determined as of the
effective date of this section, even if any shared parking
use is subsequently discontinued.
[3]
Up to 10% of parking spaces may be designed for and
allocated to compact spaces.
[4]
Parking facilities shall provide specially designated
parking spaces according to 521 CMR, the Architectural
Access Board.
[5]
(a)
Dimensions.
[1] Noncompact spaces: nine feet by 18 feet.
[2] Compact spaces: six feet by 14 feet.
(b)
Demarcation.
The lot owner shall submit to the Building Commissioner
a plan of the commercial surface parking lot drawn and
stamped by a registered professional land surveyor, known
[1]
(c)
(2)
§ 240-24.1.10 BARNSTABLE CODE § 240-24.1.10
232:396
as the "record parking plan." Any changes to the lot
boundaries or internal configuration shall require that a
new record parking plan be prepared and filed in the same
manner. All property lines and emergency access aisles
and fire lanes shall be marked as shown on the record
parking plan. In addition to showing the number of spaces
that can be accommodated according to the dimensions
herein, such plan shall depict demarcations for emergency
access aisles through a method permanently affixed to the
ground and approved by the Building Commissioner and
Fire Safety Official.
Wheel stops and/or striping shall be installed and
maintained to mark each permitted parking space.
Stacked parking spaces shall be marked using groundmounted
delineators or other demarcation.
[2]
Property boundaries for properties abutting other
separately owned properties shall be marked with fencing
or other means as may be approved by the Building
Commissioner.
[3]
Stacked parking.
Stacked parking in compliance with this section may be
permitted subject to the approval of the Building
Commissioner and the Fire Safety Official.
(a)
Lots using stacked parking configurations shall have a full-time
attendant supervising the lot and to enable owner access to
vehicles at all times.
(b)
(3)
Aisle width.
Unless otherwise provided for in this section, parking lots shall
be designed so that each motor vehicle is able to proceed to
and from the parking space provided without requiring the
moving of any other motor vehicle.
(a)
All angle parking shall have one-way circulation with an aisle
width of at least 14 feet.
(b)
Fire lanes and emergency access aisles shall be provided as
required by the Building Commissioner and the Fire Safety
Official.
(c)
(4)
Lot circulation.
Dead-end aisles, including but not limited to emergency access
aisles, and fire lanes are prohibited.
(a)
(5)
(6) Landscaping and fencing.
§ 240-24.1.10 WASTEWATER DISCHARGE § 240-24.1.10
232:397
§ 240-24.1.11. Site development standards. [Added 7-14-2005 by
Order No. 2005-100]
Parking lots shall install perimeter landscaping area along
street frontages.
(a)
(b) Fencing other than split-rail fencing is prohibited.
Lighting. Lighting shall not cause glare for motorists, pedestrians
or neighboring premises. Full cut-off light fixtures shall be used in
which no more than 2.5% of the total output is emitted at 90° from
the vertical pole or building wall on which it is mounted.
(7)
Signage. Signage provisions rely on the requirements of the
underlying zoning district or on rights that may be vested in the
property as determined by the Building Commissioner.
(8)
Accessory structures.
Parking lot kiosk. A kiosk for parking lot attendants and/or
business needs may be allowed. Kiosks are typically located at
the main entrance(s) to or exit(s) from the lot. Each kiosk shall
not exceed 150 square feet in gross floor area and shall be
located so as not to interfere with fire lanes, emergency access
aisles, or site circulation. Kiosks shall include temporary
sanitary facilities for employees. In no case shall the temporary
sanitary facility be visible from any public way. Such structures
shall be subject to applicable code or other permitting
requirements and shall not host other principal or accessory
uses such as retail without the required approvals.
(a)
Trash receptacles. All lots shall provide accommodations for
client and employee trash. Trash receptacles and/or dumpsters
shall be located near each parking lot kiosk as may be required
by the Building Commissioner and the Fire Safety Official. In
no case shall the receptacles be visible from any public way.
(b)
(9)
Application. Unless otherwise stated herein, the following additional
site development standards shall apply within the Hyannis Village
Zoning Districts, with the exception of Zone 3, the Single Family
Residential District.
Utilities and services.
Mechanical equipment, whether ground level or rooftop shall
be screened from view of adjacent properties and public rightsof-
way and designed to be an integral part of the building.
(a)
Trash containers shall be fully screened on three sides with
solid walls a minimum of six feet high with a solid front gate,
six feet high, which shall be kept closed. Trash compacters
shall be enclosed to minimize noise.
(b)
(1)
A.
§ 240-24.1.10 BARNSTABLE CODE § 240-24.1.11
232:398
Stormwater. Rain gardens, as defined in § 240-24.1.12 below, are
encouraged.
(2)
Drive-through windows. Drive-through windows are prohibited
within the Hyannis Village Zoning Districts, with the exception
that banks allowed as a principal permitted use may construct and
operate a drive-through window upon the issuance of a special
permit.
(3)
Off-street parking requirements. All new, expanded or intensified
uses shall provide adequate off-street parking. No uses shall be
intensified, except for single-family detached dwellings, without
providing adequate parking as provided herein.
Parking spaces, computation. See § 240-24.1.3 above for
additional parking regulations applicable to the HVB District.
Unless otherwise specified, all development shall comply
with the parking requirements contained in Article VI,
§ 240-56, Schedule of Off-Street Parking Requirements,
of the Barnstable Zoning Ordinance. The SPGA may by
special permit reduce the on-site and off-street parking
requirements consistent with these regulations.
[1]
For multifamily housing, off-street parking shall be
provided on-site at a ratio of 1 1/2 spaces per each
dwelling unit and shall be located not less than 30 feet
from the base of the multifamily dwelling and be easily
accessible from a driveway on the site.
[2]
Existing parking spaces may be counted to meet the
minimum off-street parking requirements for an
intensified use only if it can be demonstrated that they are
not used as of right by existing uses and are exclusively
available as of right for said proposed intensification.
[3]
Circumstances warranting reduction of requirements. The
SPGA may reduce or waive required on-site parking if
lesser off-street parking is shown to be adequate given
such special circumstances as:
Use of a common parking area by different uses
having different peak hours of demand and where
the applicant provides a lease agreement between the
necessary parties.
[a]
Age or other characteristics of occupants which
reduce auto usage.
[b]
Characteristics of use invalidating normal methods of
calculating parking demand.
[c]
[d] Supplementary parking provided off premises.
[4]
(a)
(4)
§ 240-24.1.11 WASTEWATER DISCHARGE § 240-24.1.11
232:399
Location of off-street parking spaces.
All required off-street parking spaces shall be located on
the same lot as the use for which such spaces are required,
except that the SPGA may reduce or waive on-site parking
required by the Zoning Ordinance for new development
located within 500 feet of leased parking, provided that
a lease agreement is presented as part of the site plan
approval or special permit process and provided that a
fee is paid which would be set aside for the creation of
future municipal parking facilities to service the district,
consistent with a schedule of fees, if any, to be adopted in
the Design and Infrastructure Plan. In no case shall leased
parking be allowed on land that is residentially zoned for,
or in residential use as, a single-family or a two-family
dwelling.
[1]
(b)
Parking design standards.
Parking areas shall be located to the rear of a building
unless such location would have an adverse environmental
impact, or is infeasible due to configuration of the site. To
the extent that parking cannot be located to the rear of a
building, it shall be located to the side of a building to the
extent possible.
[1]
Each off-street parking space shall have a minimum
dimension of nine feet by 20 feet, excluding the driveway,
and consistent with the dimensional parking requirements
set forth in § 240-104, Minimum parking lot design
standards, of the Barnstable Zoning Ordinance.
[2]
Maneuvering space shall be provided so that vehicles need
not back onto a public way.
[3]
Lighting shall not cause glare for motorists, pedestrians
or neighboring premises. Full cut-off light fixtures shall be
used in which no more than 2.5% of the total output is
emitted at 90° from the vertical pole or building wall on
which it is mounted.
[4]
Drainage facilities for each parking area shall be designed
and constructed to contain stormwater runoff on the
premises.
[5]
(c)
Parking lot landscaping.
Trees. One three-inch minimum caliper low-water-use,
low-maintenance tree must be provided for every five
parking spaces and must be located within 50 feet of the
parking lot. Trees shall be maintained and irrigated as
necessary and planted within at least 50 square feet of
[1]
(d)
§ 240-24.1.11 BARNSTABLE CODE § 240-24.1.11
232:400
permeable area. Existing trees located in the interior of
lots shall be credited towards this requirement.
Five or more spaces: A six-foot landscape buffer must
be provided between property lines and parking spaces.
The landscape buffer must screen parking with a dense
hedge providing year-round screening or a fence must be
constructed with no more than 50% open space between
the panels. Hedges and fences may be subject to other
regulation.
[2]
Ten or more spaces: A six-foot landscape buffer must be
provided between a building and a surface area parking lot
or drive except at entrances, building loading, and utility
locations.
[3]
Twenty-one or more spaces: at least 10% of the interior
parking lot must be landscaped. Planting along the
perimeter shall not be considered as part of the 10%.
Interior planting beds are ideally continuous to allow for
maximum plant bed size and are constructed as rain
gardens to control stormwater. No landscaped island shall
be less than six feet wide, except that in parking lots with
51 or more parking spaces where the minimum island with
shall be 10 feet.
[4]
Plant materials shall be low-water-use and lowmaintenance
and be of a sufficient size to create an
attractive appearance. A list of recommended plant
materials shall be included in the Design and
Infrastructure Plan and can be obtained from the Planning
Department. Brick or stone mulch shall not be used in
place of plant material in landscaped islands. Where mulch
is used, it shall not be placed in such a manner that it will
wash into catch basins or drainage pipes in the lot or in
adjacent roadways.
[5]
Landscaping of pre-existing parking lots.
Upon the expansion of an existing parking lot containing
21 or more parking spaces and/or an alteration of a
structure, or a change or extension of a use which
increases the parking requirements by five or more spaces
according to the standards of §§ 240-48 through 240-58,
Schedule of Off-street Parking Requirements, the entire
existing parking lot shall be brought into compliance with
this section.
[1]
(e)
Landscaping.
Existing significant trees and shrubs shall be maintained to the
maximum extent possible.
(a)
(5)
§ 240-24.1.11 WASTEWATER DISCHARGE § 240-24.1.11
232:401
The front yard landscaped setback from the road lot line shall
be 10 feet, unless otherwise specified.
(b)
Within the HD, MS, SF, HG and TD Districts, landscaped
setback from all residential property lines shall be 20 feet.
(c)
In addition to natural vegetation that is retained, the front yard
landscaped setback shall be landscaped with a combination of
indigenous grasses, trees and shrubs commonly found on Cape
Cod.
(d)
All developments must be adequately landscaped with low
water use plants and provide habitat value whenever possible.
No plantings shall obscure site entrance and exit drives and
road intersections. Planting areas should serve as stormwater
treatment areas often referred to as "rain gardens." As such
they should be designed in a way that they are slightly
depressed below adjacent parking or sidewalk grades with
run-off directed to these areas. Plantings, while encouraging
drought resistance, should be capable of withstanding
seasonally wet conditions.
(e)
Street trees. One deciduous tree with a three-inch minimum
caliper is required to be planted within the front setback for
every 30 feet of frontage of property if the front setback is
greater than zero feet. Trees in paved areas shall have a
minimum of 25 square feet of permeable area for growth.
Trees in islands shall have a minimum of 50 square feet of
permeable area for growth. All landscaped areas shall be
continuously maintained, irrigated, and fertilized. Plant
materials shall be organically maintained to the maximum
extent possible.
(f)
No occupancy certificate shall be issued until the landscape
plan has been implemented according to an approved site plan,
except the Building Commissioner may issue an occupancy
certificate prior to installation of landscape materials, provided
that the applicant posts security with the Town for 150% of the
estimated cost of installation of the plant materials.
(g)
Signage. All development shall comply with the applicable signage
requirements contained in Article VII, Sign Regulations, at
§§ 240-59 through 240-89, inclusive, of the Barnstable Zoning
Ordinance. Internally illuminated signs are prohibited in the
Hyannis Village Zoning Districts.
(6)
Lighting. Reflectors and shielding shall provide total cutoff of all
light at the property lines of the parcel to be developed.
(7)
Fences. No fence shall exceed a height of 6 1/2 feet (eight feet
when abutting a nonresidential district) from the grade plane
unless a special permit is obtained from the SPGA.
(8)
§ 240-24.1.11 BARNSTABLE CODE § 240-24.1.12
232:402
§ 240-24.1.12. Design and infrastructure plan. [Added 7-14-2005 by
Order No. 2005-100]
The Planning Board shall establish a Design and Infrastructure Plan
(DIP) which shall be adopted after public hearing. The DIP shall
establish building and site design standards for all development and
shall require, at a minimum:
(1) Consistency with the historic and maritime character of the area;
(2) Creation of livable neighborhoods for year-round residents;
Creating housing opportunities for persons and households of all
income levels;
(3)
(4) Creation of opportunities for pedestrian access and public spaces;
(5) Preservation of views and public access to the waterfront;
Creation of opportunities for eliminating curb cuts and for creating
driveway interconnections, shared driveways, public transit,
alternative transportation and/or travel demand management; and
(6)
(7) Creation of opportunities to foster history, culture and the arts.
A.
Design review. The DIP shall establish guidelines regarding the
appropriateness of the scale, placement, materials, design and detail of
buildings, landscapes and settings, and signage. The DIP shall identify
buildings and areas of the landscape that are of particular cultural,
historical and/or architectural significance and shall establish
guidelines for their preservation. The Hyannis Main Street Waterfront
Historic District Commission shall implement design review within the
Hyannis Village Zoning Districts.
B.
Infrastructure. The Downtown Hyannis area is the transportation,
health care, and commercial hub of Cape Cod. In recognition of this
and local growth initiatives for the Downtown Hyannis area, the DIP
shall identify the infrastructure and services necessary to support new
development and redevelopment, the method or methods of providing
such services, and the time schedule for providing those services.
Without limitation, the DIP may establish standards related to the
following:
The Design and Infrastructure Plan shall establish a process for
permit applicants to challenge ITE assumptions regarding trip
generation (vehicle trips per day). Based upon generally accepted
engineering, legal and planning standards, the Design and
Infrastructure Plan may modify the definition of peak hour roadway
use for specific roadways in the Hyannis Village Zoning Districts
and may establish base line traffic counts for existing land uses.
(1)
The Barnstable Town Council may establish a fee schedule to be
included in the DIP, which fee schedule shall establish the fair
(2)
C.
§ 240-24.1.12 WASTEWATER DISCHARGE § 240-24.1.12
232:403
§ 240-24.1.13. Definitions applicable to the Hyannis Village Zoning
Districts. [Added 7-14-2005 by Order No. 2005-100]
share contribution of new development and redevelopment. In such
case, the DIP shall establish the costs of providing services to new
development and redevelopment using generally accepted legal,
accounting, and planning principles. In the event the Barnstable
Town Council adopts such a fee schedule, it shall be included in the
DIP as a severable provision.
The DIP shall identify prior Town actions and future opportunities
to offset increased development in the Hyannis Village Zoning
Districts.
(3)
The DIP shall identify opportunities to benefit residents and
business owners by identifying locations for shared community
services, shared parking, shared transit and travel demand
management facilities, shared waste management facilities, and
similar facilities.
(4)
In the interpretation of §§ 240-24.1.1 through 240-24.1.11, the
following words and terms are to be used and interpreted as defined
herein unless the context otherwise requires. The definitions contained
in § 240-128 of the Barnstable Zoning Ordinance shall also apply to
§ 240-24.1.1 through 240-24.1.11, provided that, in the event of a
conflict the definitions below shall apply.
A.
As used in § 240-24.1.1 through 240-24.1.11, the following terms shall
have the meanings indicated:
ACCESSORY USE — A structure or use that is subordinate in building
area, building extent, and purpose to the principal use; is customarily
incidental and subordinate to the principal use and contributes to the
comfort, convenience, or necessity of the principal use; and, is located
on the same lot as the principal use.
ART GALLERY — A public or private facility which is operated as a
repository or a collection of works of individual art pieces, not massproduced,
consisting of one or more of the following: paintings,
drawings, etchings or sculptures; may include the sale of related
objects and services.
ARTIST'S LOFT — A place designed to be used as both a dwelling
and a place of work by an artist, artisan, or craftsperson, including
persons engaged in the application, teaching, or performance of fine
arts, such as drawing, vocal or instrumental music, painting, sculpture,
photography, graphics, media arts, and writing. The work activities
shall not adversely impact the public health, safety, and welfare, or the
livability, functioning, and appearance of adjacent property.
AUTOMATED BANKING FACILITY (ATM) — An automated device,
which is operated by the customer, that performs banking or financial
transactions.
B.
§ 240-24.1.12 BARNSTABLE CODE § 240-24.1.13
232:404
AUTOMOBILE GASOLINE AND REPAIR STATION — A retail
establishment engaged in the sale of automotive fuel, motor oil, and/
or services, which provides for the routine maintenance of automobiles.
Such services may include washing, polishing, greasing, emissions
testing, tire repair, wheel alignment, brake repair, muffler replacement,
engine tune-up, flushing of radiators, servicing of air conditioners, and
other activities of minor repair and servicing.
BANK — A financial institution that is open to the public and engaged
in deposit banking, and that performs closely related functions, such as
making loans, investments, and fiduciary activities. Walk-in services to
consumers are generally provided on site. Drive-through services may
be allowed by special permit where banks are allowed as a principal
permitted use.
BUILDING HEIGHT — Shall be measured as the vertical distance from
the grade plane to the average height of the highest roof plane that also
has the highest ridgeline.
BUILDING STORY — The vertical distance from top to top of two
successive tiers of beams or finished floor surfaces; and, for the
topmost story, from the top of the floor finish to the top of the ceiling
joists or, where there is not a ceiling, to the top of the roof rafters.
BUSINESS OFFICES — Include all types of offices, other than
professional offices as defined elsewhere in this chapter, which are
defined as a room, or group of rooms used for conducting the affairs of
a business, service industry, or government entity.
BUSINESS SUPPORT SERVICES — Establishments engaged in the
sale, rental, or repair of office equipment, supplies, and materials,
or the provision of services used by office, professional, and service
establishments. Typical uses include office equipment and supply firms,
small business machine or computer repair shops, convenience printing
and copying establishments, or hotel equipment and supply firms.
CLINIC, DENTAL OR MEDICAL — A building or portion of a building
in which the primary use is the provision of health care services to
patients or clients. Such services may include the following: medical,
dental, psychiatric, psychological, chiropractic, dialysis, acupuncture,
reflexology, mental health professional, physical and/or occupational
therapy, related medical services, or a laboratory which provides
bacteriological, biological, medical, x-ray, pathological and similar
analytical or diagnostic services to doctors or dentists. This definition
excludes in-patient or overnight care, animal hospitals, veterinarians,
or other similar services. The sale of merchandise is allowed only as an
accessory use.[Amended 3-18-2010 by Order. No. 2010-069]
CONFERENCE CENTER — A facility which provides meeting halls for
conferences, seminars, training and other similar functions for large
numbers of people. A conference center shall be considered to be an
accessory use to a hotel.
§ 240-24.1.13 WASTEWATER DISCHARGE § 240-24.1.13
232:405
CONVENIENCE STORE GAS STATION — A facility associated with the
sale of prepackaged food items and other retail goods, primarily for
self-service by the consumer which also offers the retail sale of gasoline
from pumps.
DESIGN AND INFRASTRUCTURE PLAN — A plan establishing site and
building design standards and establishing fair share contributions to
infrastructure (impact fees) for new development and redevelopment,
as further defined in § 240.24.1.11 herein.
DRIVE-THROUGH WINDOW — This use is prohibited in all districts,
with the exception that banks may seek a special permit to construct
and operate a drive-through window.
DRIVEWAY/CURB CUT — Any access point onto a roadway. This may
include, but is not limited to, an entrance to a parcel, or an intersection
with another roadway.
DRIVEWAY INTERCONNECTION — A private driveway connection
between two lots that does not require traveling on the public roadway
system.
FLOOR AREA RATIO (FAR) — The ratio of gross building area to the
lot area on which the building(s) are located. The ratio is calculated by
dividing the gross area of said buildings by said lot area.
FRATERNAL OR SOCIAL ORGANIZATION LODGE — A building or land
used for the activities of an association of persons for the promotion of
some nonprofit common objective, such as literature, science, politics,
and good fellowship (not accessory to, or operated as, or in connection
with a tavern, eating place, or other place open to the public), which
meets periodically and may be limited to members.
GRADE PLANE — A reference plane representing the natural,
undisturbed ground level adjoining the proposed building at all exterior
walls. Where the ground level slopes away from the exterior walls, the
reference plane shall be established by the lowest points within the
area between the building and a point six feet from the building, or
between the building and the lot line, whichever point is closer.
GROUND FLOOR — The floor located at the street level, closest to the
naturally occurring grade.
HABITABLE ATTIC — The habitable space between the rafters of a
pitched roof and the next floor below.
HABITABLE SPACE — Space in a structure for living, sleeping, eating
or cooking. Bathrooms, toilet compartments, closets, halls, storage or
utility space and other similar areas are not considered "habitable
space."
HEALTH CLUB — A building or portion of a building designed and
equipped for the conduct of exercise and related activities utilizing
weight control or muscle building equipment or other apparatus for the
§ 240-24.1.13 BARNSTABLE CODE § 240-24.1.13
232:406
purpose of physical fitness, along with customary ancillary activities
and facilities.
HIGHEST ROOF PLANE — The roof plane having the highest ridge and
having highest average height (exclusive of cupolas and parapets) or
the flat roof that is higher than any pitched roof.
HOSPITAL — A facility for the care and treatment of patients as
licensed by the Massachusetts Department of Public Health under MGL
c. 111, § 51.
HOTEL — One or more buildings providing temporary lodging
accommodations offered to the public on a daily rate for compensation.
The building or buildings have an interior hall and lobby with access
to each room from such interior hall or lobby, supervised by a person
in charge at all hours. Accessory uses may include a restaurant,
conference center facility, meeting rooms, health club and other
customary uses.
HYANNIS VILLAGE ZONING DISTRICTS — The seven Hyannis zoning
districts including HVB, MS, SF, OM, HD, HG and TD.
LOT COVERAGE, MAXIMUM — A measure of the portion of a site
that is impervious (i.e., does not absorb water), including but not
limited to all areas covered by buildings, structures, parked surfaces
and structures, driveways, roads, sidewalks and any area of concrete
asphalt, except as otherwise defined herein. The remaining area of a
site shall be maintained as natural vegetation or landscaped area.
MIXED-USE DEVELOPMENT — Development including residential and
nonresidential principal permitted uses on a single lot and including at
least 33% residential development for three-story buildings.
MOTEL — One or more attached or detached buildings providing
residential room accommodations intended primarily for sleeping
which are rented out to the public on a daily rate, where each room has
a separate entrance leading directly outside the building.
MULTIFAMILY HOUSING — A structure containing three or more
dwelling units, or apartments, each of which shall contain separate
living, sleeping, cooking, and bathroom facilities for the families
residing there.
MUSEUMS — A public or private facility, including an aquarium,
established for preserving and exhibiting artistic, historical, scientific,
natural or man-made objects of interest, designed to be used by
members of the public for viewing, with or without an admission
charge. Such activity may include, as an accessory use, the sale of
memorabilia, crafts work and artwork, and the holding of meetings and
social events.
NURSING HOME — A facility for the aged or chronically ill, providing
bed-care and in-patient services for persons requiring regular medical
attention, but excluding a facility providing surgical or emergency
medical services.
§ 240-24.1.13 WASTEWATER DISCHARGE § 240-24.1.13
232:407
OFFICE, DENTAL OR MEDICAL — A building or portion of a building
in which the primary use is the provision of health-care services to
patients or clients by an appointment only. Appointments limited to
the hours between 7:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m., Monday through Friday,
and Saturday from 7:00 a.m. to 1:00 p.m. Such services may include
the following: medical, dental, psychiatric, psychological, chiropractic,
dialysis, acupuncture, reflexology, mental health professional, physical
and/or occupational therapy, related medical services, or a laboratory
which provides bacteriological, biological, medical, x-ray, pathological
and similar analytical or diagnostic services to doctors or dentists.
This definition excludes in-patient or overnight care, animal hospitals,
veterinarians, or other similar services. The sale of merchandise is
allowed only as an accessory use.[Added 3-18-2010 by Order No.
2010-069]
PACKAGING AND DELIVERY SERVICES — The packaging and delivery
of parcels as a retail service use. It shall not include the bulk storage
of parcels on-site but may include the sale of ancillary goods typically
used in the packaging and shipping of parcels.
PARKING FACILITY — When identified as a permitted principle use
within a zoning district, refers to either structured parking (such as a
multi-level parking garage or parking deck), or a surface parking lot,
which is not an accessory use to another permitted use in the district.
PEAK-HOUR ROADWAY USE — For Monday through Friday, peak
morning (7:30 a.m. to 9:30 a.m.) and peak evening (4:00 p.m. to 6:00
p.m.) roadway use; for Saturday, 10:00 a.m. to 12:00 p.m. roadway
use. Based upon accepted engineering, legal and planning standards,
the Design and Infrastructure Plan may change, modify or expand
the definition of peak hour roadway use for specific roadways in the
Hyannis Village Zoning Districts.
PERFORMING ARTS FACILITY — An enclosed space suitable for a
variety of cultural arts performances, permanently available for the
primary principal use of public performing arts presentations, such
as plays, dances, and concerts, although incidental use for private
meetings, exhibits and presentations shall be permitted. Such space
may also include studios, classrooms, and galleries.
PERSONAL SERVICES ESTABLISHMENT — An establishment engaged
in the provision of frequent or recurrent needed services of a personal
nature. Typical uses include, but are not limited to, barbershop, beauty
shop, dry cleaner, tailor, or other similar services, but shall not include
a public laundry where clothing is laundered on-site.
PROFESSIONAL OFFICES — The office of a member of a recognized
profession maintained for the conduct of that profession. A "profession"
is defined as an occupation requiring training in the liberal arts or
sciences, or combination thereof, requiring advanced study in a
specialized field, any occupation requiring licensing by the state and
maintenance of professional standards applicable to the field. This
§ 240-24.1.13 BARNSTABLE CODE § 240-24.1.13
232:408
category excludes medical and dental offices and clinics but includes
lawyers and realtors.
PUBLISHING AND PRINTING ESTABLISHMENT — The publishing and
printing of information as a retail service use. It shall not include the
bulk publishing or printing of paper documents on-site, but may include
the sale of ancillary goods typically used in the publishing and printing
of information.
RAIN GARDEN — A bowl-shaped landscape area designed to absorb
stormwater runoff from impervious surfaces. It cleanses water of
pollutants by filtering water through soil and plants.
RECREATIONAL ESTABLISHMENT — An establishment engaged in
the provision of public recreational services, including bowling and
billiards, but not including miniature golf and video arcades.
REPAIR SERVICES — Repair and servicing of appliances, computers,
electronic equipment, tools and other small machinery common to
homes and businesses, not to include any appliances, tools or small
machinery that are powered by hydrocarbon fuel.
RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT FACILITY — A business that engages
in research and development of innovative ideas and technology.
Examples include research and development of computer software,
information systems, communication systems, transportation, multimedia
and video technology. Development and construction of
prototypes may be associated with this use.
RESTAURANT — An establishment where food and/or beverages are
prepared, served, and consumed, and whose principal method of
operation includes one or both of the following characteristics:
customers are normally provided with an individual menu and served
their food and beverages by a restaurant employee at the same table
or counter where the items are consumed; or a cafeteria-type operation
where food and beverages generally are consumed within the
restaurant building. This category excludes drive-through restaurants.
RESTAURANT, DRIVE-THROUGH — An establishment whose primary
business is serving food to the public for consumption on or off the
premises, and which provides all or part of these services by means
of a drive-through window. A "drive-through window" is defined as an
opening in the wall of a building or structure designed and intended to
be used to provide for sales to and/or service to patrons who remain in
their vehicles.
RETAIL USES — A business or activity having as its primary function
the sale of merchandise or wares to the end consumer (for example,
grocery stores, hardware stores, apparel stores, bookstores); or
establishments engaged in the rental of goods at retail, or in providing
a service(s) to individuals and households (for example, travel agents
or real estate sales offices). This category excludes animal sales or
service; bulk retail sales or rental of building and garden materials or
equipment (for example, lumber, electrical and heating fixtures, plant
§ 240-24.1.13 WASTEWATER DISCHARGE § 240-24.1.13
232:409
§ 240-24.2. Marstons Mills Village Zoning District. [Added
6-17-2010 by Order No. 2010-122]
nurseries); and motor vehicle retail or wholesale sales and related
equipment sales, leasing, rental, or repair.
RETIREMENT HOUSING — A facility for long-term residency
exclusively by persons 60 years of age or older, which provides
independent living and/or assisted living arrangements, and which may
include common dining and social and recreational features, and
special safety and convenience features designed for the needs of the
elderly. The facility may also include the provision of services, such as
meal services, transportation, housekeeping, personal care, or health
care. Such a facility shall not be construed to mean a nursing home,
group home, or residential treatment center.
SPGA — The special permit granting authority, which shall be the
Barnstable Planning Board.
STREET LINE — The edge of the public layout of the street, or public
right-of-way as defined by the sidewalk, whichever is greater.
TOTAL FLOOR AREA — Gross floor area as defined in § 240-128 of the
Barnstable Zoning Ordinance, and shall include additions and auxiliary
buildings.
TOWNHOUSE — A single dwelling unit which is not above or below
another dwelling unit and whose side walls are separated from other
dwelling units by a fire wall or walls. Each unit in the row may be owned
by a separate owner.
VEHICLE TRIPS PER DAY — As defined by the Institute of
Transportation Engineers' (ITE) Trip Generation Manual, 7th Edition, as
that publication may be amended from time to time, provided, however,
that the Design and Infrastructure Plan shall establish a process for
permit applicants to challenge ITE assumptions regarding trip
generation, and the Design and Infrastructure Plan may establish
existing vehicle trips per day for a particular use or uses in the Hyannis
Village Zoning Districts.
WORKFORCE HOUSING — Residential dwelling units, offered for sale
or rent, affordable to families earning between 81% and 120% of the
area median income, as defined by the U.S. Department of Housing and
Urban Development, and provided within a multifamily structure. Such
residential dwelling units shall remain affordable in perpetuity and
shall provide a deed restriction, regulatory agreement and monitoring
agreement and similar documentation as may be required by and
approved by the Barnstable Town Attorney.
Principal permitted uses. The following uses are permitted in the
Marstons Mills Village Zoning District (MMVD). Uses not expressly
allowed are prohibited.
A.
§ 240-24.1.13 BARNSTABLE CODE § 240-24.2
232:410
(1) Professional or business office.
(2) Medical or dental office.
Branch office of a bank or credit union, excluding drive-through
banking.
(3)
(4) Small-scale retail.
(5) Small-scale food service.
Mixed use development where the building footprint does not
exceed 5,000 square feet and total gross floor area does not exceed
10,000 square feet with retail or office use on the first floor,
residential apartment units above not to exceed four apartment
units.
(6)
Bed-and-breakfast within an owner-occupied single-family
residential structure subject to the provisions of § 240-11C(6)
except Subsection C(6)(b) [1] and [2]. No more than six total rooms
shall be rented to not more than 12 total guests at any one time.
For the purposes of this section, children under the age of 12 years
shall not be considered in the total number of guests.
(7)
(8) Single-family residential dwelling (detached).
Accessory uses. In addition to Article V, Accessory Uses, herein, the
following uses are also permitted as accessory uses in the MMV
District.
(1) Apartment incidental to a nonresidential use.
Automated banking facilities (ATM) within a principal building or a
walk-up ATM facility located in a side or rear yard.
(2)
B.
Conditional uses. The following uses are permitted as conditional uses
in the MMV District, provided that a special permit is first obtained
from the Zoning Board of Appeals, subject to the provisions of
§ 240-125C herein and the specific standards for such conditional uses
as required in this section:
Mixed use development in excess of that permitted as of right
above provided that:
The building footprint does not exceed 5,000 square feet and
total gross floor area of the building does not exceed 13,300
square feet;
(a)
Retail or office use on the first floor with residential apartment
units above;
(b)
The number of residential apartment units does not exceed
seven;
(c)
(1)
C.
§ 240-24.2 WASTEWATER DISCHARGE § 240-24.2
232:411
Effluent from the on-site septic system for the mixed use
development complies fully with all Board of Health
regulations without relief or variances from the Board of
Health nitrogen standard for this area; and
(d)
The location of the mixed use development is appropriate and
compatible with abutting uses and supports abutting uses.
(e)
(2) Health clubs.
(3) Artist's lofts.
(4) Art galleries.
(5) Museums.
(6) Performing arts facilities.
(7) Educational institutions.
Bed-and-breakfast inns within an owner-occupied structure that
exceed the provisions of accessory uses permitting, provided that
the on-site septic system complies fully with all current Board of
Health regulations.
(8)
(9) Not-for-profit fraternal or social organizations.
Special permit standards. In addition to the standards for the grant of
a special permit set forth in § 240-125C, the grant of any special permit
within the MMVD requires findings to support that the development
meets one or more of the following criteria:
The development maintains or improves pedestrian access and
outdoor public spaces.
(1)
The development contributes to the historic character of the
Marstons Mills Village area.
(2)
The development eliminates or minimizes curb cuts and driveways
on Route 149 and River Road.
(3)
D.
E. Bulk regulations.
§ 240-24.2 BARNSTABLE CODE § 240-24.2
232:412
Minimum Yard
Setbacks
Minimum
Lot Area
(square
feet)
Minimum
Lot
Frontage
(feet)
Front4
(feet)
Side
(feet)1
Rear
(feet)1
Maximum
Building
Height
(feet)
Maximum
Coverage
by
Structures
as a
Percentage
of Lot
Area3
10,000 20 10 0 0 302 20%
Notes:
1 A minimum thirty-foot side or rear yard setback is required where lot
boundaries abut a residential district.
2 Or 2 1/2 stories, whichever is less, and except that:
The maximum building height may be increased to 36 feet when the
roof pitch is at least six in 12.
Accessory rooftop equipment may extend to 36 feet, provided that
it is set back from all exterior wall(s) by at least 10 feet, and is
enclosed or screened with materials compatible with the building,
and the equipment and screening are not visible from the ground.
Accessory equipment shall not exceed 20% of the roof area.
3 30% of the total upland area of the lot shall remain pervious and
may contain landscaping, tree plantings, mulch or natural vegetation
including the requirements of § 240-53.
4 Front yard landscape setback from the road lot line shall be 10
feet. Existing trees and shrubs shall be retained within the road rightof-
way and within the required front yard landscaped setback and
supplemented with other landscape materials, in accordance with
accepted landscape practices. Where natural vegetation cannot be
retained, the front yard landscaped setback shall be landscaped with
a combination of grasses, trees and shrubs commonly found on Cape
Cod. A minimum of one street tree with a minimum caliper of 3.0
inches shall be provided per 30 feet of road frontage distributed
throughout the front yard setback area. No plantings shall obscure the
site at entrance and exit drives and road intersections. All landscaped
areas shall be continuously maintained, substantially in accordance
with any site plan approved pursuant to Article IX herein.
Special permit for dimensional relief. The SPGA may provide relief
from minimum yard setbacks where the boundary does not abut a
residential district, facade length requirements or ground floor window
requirements when such relief is consistent with this section and
§ 240-125C.
F.
§ 240-24.2 WASTEWATER DISCHARGE § 240-24.2
232:413
Nonconforming use limitations. Within the MMVD the change of a
nonconforming use to another nonconforming use is prohibited
notwithstanding the provisions of § 240-94A. A nonconforming use shall
only be permitted to change to a principal permitted use as of right or
to a conditional use as provided for by the grant of a special permit
pursuant to § 240-24.2C and D herein.
G.
Corporate branding. Buildings, colors, signage, architectural features,
text, symbols, graphics, other attention-getting devices and landscape
elements that are trademarked, branded or designed to identify with
a particular formula business chain or corporation is prohibited. All
structures and sites shall be designed to include architectural and
design elements that are consistent with the MMVD architectural
composition, character, and historic context. Interior corporate
branding elements shall not be visible to the street through windows,
doors or any other means. The Town will work with applicants to adapt
critical functional features of prototype plans to their sites, but will not
accept standard plans, building forms, elevations, materials, or colors
that do not relate to the site, adjacent development or Marstons Mills
community character.
H.
Design guidelines. Within the MMVD the following design guidelines
shall apply to all new buildings and structures and/or expansions and
alteration to existing buildings and structures as follows:
Facade and roof standards.
Facade length. Buildings or portions of a building with a mass
over 50 feet wide must divide their elevations into smaller
parts. A pronounced change in massing, pronounced changes
in wall planes and introducing significant variations in the
cornice/roofline are all possible methods to accomplish the
desired divisions of elevations into smaller parts.
(a)
Roof pitch. Roof pitch for new structures and additions to
existing structures shall be within the range of roof pitches
found on the main roofs of existing structures within the
MMVD. Flat roofs may extend up to 20 linear feet only in
combination with other pitched roof elements by right or, if
greater than 20 feet with other pitched roof elements, through
a special permit.
(b)
Roofline variation. Roofline variation is achieved by visually
and physically changing roof direction or off-setting roof peaks
and ridgelines, both horizontally and vertically. The roofline
shall be varied on all elevations visible from a street, parking
area, or public space. Individual segments of the roofline shall
not extend more than 30 feet in width measured horizontally.
(c)
(1)
Ground floor windows. Religious institutions are exempt from
ground floor window requirements.
(2)
I.
§ 240-24.2 BARNSTABLE CODE § 240-24.2
232:414
All new nonresidential development or redevelopment shall
provide ground floor windows for facades facing the street,
including windows that allow views into working areas or
lobbies, pedestrian entrances, or display windows. The glazing
pattern shall be aligned in regular and traditional patterns
found within the MMVD.
(a)
In new and redeveloped nonresidential structures, windows
that block two-way visibility, such as darkly tinted and
mirrored windows, are prohibited as ground floor windows
along street facades.
(b)
In new and redeveloped nonresidential structures, any wall
that is within 30 feet of the street shall contain at least 20%
of the ground floor wall area facing the street in display areas,
windows, or doorways. Blank walls, including walls that do not
include display areas, windows, architectural features, and/or
doorways, are prohibited.
(c)
All structures within the MMVD shall utilize at least four of the
following design features:
(a) Gables.
(b) Offsets on the building face or roof of at least two inches.
(c) Gable dormers.
(d) Cupolas or other appropriate roof elements.
(e) Covered porch or recessed entry area.
(f) Window shutters.
(g) Horizontal lap siding.
(h) Wood shingles.
(3)
Divided light windows metal-sided buildings are prohibited within
the Marstons Mills Village District.
(4)
Drive-through and drive-up windows are prohibited within the
Marstons Mills Village District.
(5)
The design of all structures and materials selected for their
exterior surfaces will utilize scale, color and materials that enhance
and promulgate the traditional small-scale village character
currently found in the MMVD.
(6)
Signs. In addition to compliance with Article VII, Sign Regulations,
the following restrictions shall also apply to all signs in the MMVD.
Internally illuminated signs, halo and backlit signs are
prohibited in the MMVD.
(a)
(7)
§ 240-24.2 WASTEWATER DISCHARGE § 240-24.2
232:415
Business identity, either by awnings, accent bands, paint or
other applied color schemes, signage, decorative roof details
or materials should not be the dominant architectural feature.
(b)
Site development standards. In addition to Article IX, Site Plan Review,
and Article VI, Off-Street Parking, the following additional
requirements shall apply within the MMVD.
Loading docks. Loading docks shall be screened from Route 149,
River Road and Main Street with landscaping or fencing materials
of an appropriate scale.
(1)
To the greatest extent feasible, all new parking areas shall be
located to the side and rear of the building. Parking is not
permitted in the required front yard setback with the exception of
parking required by ADA compliance as determined by the Building
Commissioner.
(2)
Curb cuts and driveways.
Shared driveways and parking area interconnections are
strongly encouraged. No more than one curb cut on Route 149,
River Road and Main Street shall be allowed for any lot. For
traffic safety and to maintain traffic flow, no new driveways
shall be permitted on Route 149, River Road and Main Street
within 200 feet of any intersection.
(a)
Driveways shall not exceed the width required by site plan
review
(b)
(3)
Lighting.
All developments shall use full cutoff light fixtures for exterior
lighting in which no more than 2.5% of the total output is
emitted at 90° from the vertical pole or building wall on which
it is mounted.
(a)
(b) Flood, area and up lighting is prohibited.
(4)
J.
Definitions. The following terms are defined for the purpose of the
MMVD and shall not be construed to apply to other regulations.
APARTMENT — One or more rooms with private bath and kitchen
facilities comprising an independent self-contained rental dwelling unit
(a unit not owned in fee simple) located in a building where the
principal use is nonresidential.
MIXED USE DEVELOPMENT — Development including at least one
residential unit and at least one nonresidential use on a single lot
or several nonresidential uses on a single lot. In the MMV District,
for every four apartment units permitted, one of those units shall be
dedicated as affordable in addition to the provisions of Chapter 9,
Article I, Inclusionary Affordable Housing Requirements.
K.
§ 240-24.2 BARNSTABLE CODE § 240-24.2
232:416
§ 240-25. HB Business District. [Amended 11-7-1987 by Art. 1;
5-7-1988 by Art. 4; 3-11-1999 by Order No. 99-058; 12-20-2018 by
Order No. 2019-032]
SMALL-SCALE FOOD SERVICE — An establishment where food is
served to customers by wait staff. Small-scale food service does not
include restaurants designed to serve a large volume of customers.
Small-scale food service is subject to corporate branding limitations
as described herein. These uses are intended to increase pedestrian
traffic.
SMALL-SCALE RETAIL — Small stores and businesses, including but
not limited to, corner groceries, artist space, bookstore, galleries and
other small retail uses typically found in small New England towns.
Small-scale retail does not include retail or commercial buildings or
storage designed to serve a large volume of customers, e.g. gasoline
and oil filling stations, garages for automotive or machine repair. Smallscale
retail is subject to corporate branding limitations as described
herein. These uses are intended to increase pedestrian activity.
Purpose. The proposed amendments to the Highway Business District
strive to encourage investment in Barnstable's aging commercial
corridors and respond to current market demands, while promoting
an increase in property values, appropriate protection for adjacent
residential land uses, and Barnstable's unique character and
exceptional quality of life.
A.
Principal permitted uses. The following uses are permitted in the HB
Business District:
(1) Art galleries.
(2) Artisan, craftspersons, and meakers.
(3) Artists' lofts.
(4) Bank.1
(5) Bed-and-breakfasts, subject to the provisions of § 240-11C(6).
(6) Business support services.
(7) Dwelling, single-family.
(8) Dwelling, two-family.
(9) Dwelling, multifamily.
(10)Educational institutions.
(11)Fraternal or social organizations.
(12)Health club.
B.
§ 240-24.2 WASTEWATER DISCHARGE § 240-25
232:417
(13)Mixed use development.
(14)Movie theatre.
(15)Museums.
(16)Office, business and professional.
(17)Office, dental or medical.
(18)Performing arts facilities.
(19)Personal service establishments.
(20)Recreational establishment.
Research and development, technological and computer research,
software development and data processing including computer
operations services.
(21)
(22)Restaurant and other food establishment.1
(23)Retail and wholesale.1
(24)Senior living, assisted living
(25)Senior living, nursing homes.
Veterinary hospital/clinic.2
1 Drive-throughs shall be permitted accessory to such use, subject
to the issuance of a Special Permit pursuant to § 240-25C herein.
2 The landscape setback from all residential property lines shall
be 20 feet. Within the landscape buffer, existing mature trees
shall be retained and shall be supplemented with plantings that
will provide dense year-round screening, or a solid fence with
landscape plantings on the residential side.
3 Parking areas for commercial vehicles and any exterior areas
used for loading or storage and dumpsters shall be screened from
view from the public way.
(26)
Conditional uses. The following uses are permitted as conditional uses
in the HB District, provided that a special permit is first obtained from
the Zoning Board of Appeals subject to the provisions of § 240-125C
herein and subject to the specific standards for such conditional uses
as required in this section, and to a finding that such uses do not
substantially adversely affect the public health, safety, welfare, comfort
or convenience of the community:
(1) Auto service and repair shops.1
(2) Building, sale, rental, storage and repair of boats.1
C.
§ 240-25 BARNSTABLE CODE § 240-25
232:418
(3) Car rental services.1
(4) Contractors' yards.1, 2
(5) Funeral home or mortuary.1
(6) Hotel and motel, subject to the provisions in § 240-22F.155
(7) Manufacturing, light and industrial uses.1, 2
(8) Retail, gasoline or diesel.1
(9) Warehouse or distribution.1, 2
Drive-throughs for banks, retail uses, and restaurants and other
food service establishments.
(10)
Contractor service establishments.1, 2
1 The landscape setback from all residential property lines shall
be 10 feet. Within the landscape buffer, existing mature trees
shall be retained and shall be supplemented with plantings that
will provide dense year-round screening, or a solid fence with
landscape plantings on the residential side.
2 Parking areas for commercial vehicles and any exterior areas
used for loading or storage and dumpsters shall be screened from
view from the public way.
(11)
Bulk regulations.
Minimum Yard Setbacks (Feet)
Zoning
District
Minimum
Lot Area
(square
feet)
Minimum
Lot
Frontage
(feet)
Minimum
Lot
Width
(feet) Front Rear Side
Maximum
Building
Height
(feet)
Maximum
Lot
Coverage
as % of
Lot Area
HB 15,000 20 100 201, 2 20 10 383 30
D.
55.Editor's Note: So in original.
§ 240-25 WASTEWATER DISCHARGE § 240-25
232:419
1 Forty feet along Route 28 and Route 132.
2 The front yard setback shall be a landscape setback in which
existing trees and shrubs shall be retained within and supplemented
with other landscape materials in accordance with accepted
landscape practices. Where natural vegetation cannot be retained,
the front yard landscape setback shall be landscaped with a
combination of grasses, trees and shrubs commonly found on Cape
Cod. A minimum of one street tree with a minimum caliper of three
inches shall be provided per 30 feet of road frontage and distributed
throughout the front yard landscape setback area. No plantings shall
obscure site entrance and exit drives and/or road intersections. All
landscape areas shall be continuously maintained substantially in
accordance with Article IX herein.
3 Or three stories, whichever is lesser.
District-wide design and performance standards.
Applicability.
Design and performance standards for the Highway Business
District are provided in this subsection. Design and
performance standards shall apply to expansions and
modifications and new development as defined herein. Design
and performance standards shall not apply to changes of use
or tenancy changes in an existing building or expansions or
modifications below the thresholds defined in Subsection
E(1)(a)[1].
Expansions or modifications. A project shall be considered
an expansion or modification where any alterations to an
existing building are proposed that exceed the following
thresholds, but do not meet the designation of New
Development as described in Subsection E(1)(b) below:
An expansion of the footprint of a building by more
than 20%.
[a]
More than 50% of the exterior walls or 50% of the roof
area are completely removed or replaced.
Alterations to existing structures to accommodate
second- or third-floor additions shall not be
considered for the purposes of calculating this
subsection.
[i]
[b]
[1]
Changes to the interior of a structure or the addition
of accessory equipment shall not be considered when
determining what constitutes an expansion or
modification.
[2]
(a)
(1)
E.
§ 240-25 BARNSTABLE CODE § 240-25
232:420
New development. A project shall be considered new
development where a building for a principal use is proposed
for construction that did not previously exist within the HB.
New development may include new construction or demolition
and reconstruction.
(b)
Building design standards.
In addition to the site plan review submittal requirements of
§ 240-102, architectural elevations shall be submitted.
(a)
Building facades.
Building facades shall not contain blank wall areas that
exceed 25 linear feet, measured parallel to the street.
[1]
New development shall vary the building footprint so that
there are pronounced changes in the wall planes and
building mass as defined herein. For every 50 linear feet of
facade, at least 10 feet projection or setback in the facade
should be accommodated. The recess or projection can be
split into several components, but changes in the facade
line of 10 feet or greater are most likely to reduce the
visual impact of the building mass.
[2]
(b)
Building entries.
All buildings shall have an orientation to and entrance
from the sidewalk along the primary building frontage.
Entrances shall be visually distinctive from the remaining
portions of the facade along which they are located.
[1]
(c)
Roof.
Parapet walls along the roof shall feature threedimensional
cornice treatments or other shadow-creating
details.
[1]
(d)
Building materials.
The following building materials are prohibited on any
facade:
[a] Plain concrete block.
[b] Glass block.
Exposed aggregate (rough finish) concrete wall
panels.
[c]
[d] Plastic.
[e] Corrugated metal.
[1]
(e)
(2)
§ 240-25 WASTEWATER DISCHARGE § 240-25
232:421
Multitenant centers. Multitenant retail centers shall comply
with the following additional design standards.
A cohesive character is required through the use of
coordinated building design, hardscape treatment (special
paving materials, lighting, etc.) and landscaping.
[1]
(f)
Parking lot design standards.
All new development shall comply with § 240-54, Location of
parking lot in relation to buildings, which states: "Parking lots
shall be located to the rear or side of a building unless such
location would have an adverse environmental impact or is
infeasible due to configuration of the site."
(a)
(3)
Site design standards.
Sites shall incorporate safe pedestrian access to the building(s)
from the public right-of-way and safe pedestrian circulation
within the development. Where pedestrian connections cross
primary vehicular driveways or aisles, the walkways shall be
designed to clearly show the space is dedicated to pedestrian
traffic through the use of raised or alternative surfaces.
(a)
Parking areas shall include provisions for the "parking" of
bicycles in bicycle racks in locations that are safely segregated
from automobile traffic and parking. For parking areas of 10
or more spaces, bicycle racks facilitating locking shall be
provided to accommodate one bicycle per 20 parking spaces or
fraction thereof.
(b)
(4)
Screening.
Storage areas, loading docks, rooftop equipment, utility
buildings, dumpsters and similar features shall be screened so
as not to be visible to a pedestrian from within the right-of-way
of a street abutting the property containing the building. The
screening shall complement the design of the building through
the use of similar materials, colors, finishes and architectural
details. Plant materials may be used for ground level
screening.
(a)
Access. Driveways on Route 28, Route 132 and West Main
Street shall be minimized. All driveways and changes to
driveways shall:
Provide the minimum number of driveways necessary to
provide safe and convenient vehicular and emergency
vehicle access.
[1]
Provide shared access with adjacent development where
feasible.
[2]
(b)
(5)
§ 240-25 BARNSTABLE CODE § 240-25
232:422
Provide a driveway interconnection between adjacent
parcels to avoid short trips and conflicts on the main road.
[3]
Definitions. The following terms are defined for the purpose of the HB
and shall not be construed to apply to other regulations:
ARTISAN, CRAFTSPERSONS AND MAKERS — A small-scale use
employing people who practice manual skills to produce ornamental or
functional works in limited quantities. A key feature of works produced
by artisans, craftspeople or makers is the high degree of manual or
specialized technical expertise involved. Examples include artists or
makers in a variety of mediums, designers, and art conservation.
ARTIST'S LOFT — A place designed to be used as both a dwelling
and a place of work by an artist, artisan, or craftsperson, including
persons engaged in the application, teaching, or performance of fine
arts, such as drawing, vocal or instrumental music, painting, sculpture,
photography, graphics, media arts, and writing. The work activities
shall not adversely impact the public health, safety, and welfare, or the
livability, functioning, and appearance of adjacent property.
AUTO SERVICE AND REPAIR SHOPS — A facility for the general repair
and maintenance of motor vehicles, including motor vehicle inspections
and car washes. This definition shall exclude vehicle dismantling or
salvage.
CONTRACTOR SERVICE ESTABLISHMENTS — Wholesale sales and
distribution of building materials including plumbing, carpentry,
lumber, electrical, heating and air conditioning, and other similar
service or repair businesses; associated showrooms and sales/display
space customarily accessory to such uses.
CONTRACTORS' YARDS — Landscaping, construction and site
preparation, and other similar service businesses, provided that all
outdoor storage of building materials, trucks and landscaping
equipment and materials, are screened from view from public ways.
EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTIONS — A public or private facility that offers
in-classroom instruction at the PreK-12 or post-secondary levels. The
institution may also have research facilities and/or professional schools
that grant master and doctoral degrees. "Educational institutions" also
include facilities that offer in-classroom vocational instruction in
industrial, clerical, computer, managerial, automotive, repair
(electrical, plumbing, carpentry, etc.), or commercial skills, or a
business conducted as a commercial enterprise, such as a school for
general educational development or driving school.
FRATERNAL OR SOCIAL ORGANIZATIONS — A building or land used
for the activities of an association of persons for the promotion of some
nonprofit common objective, such as literature, science, politics, and
good fellowship (not accessory to, or operated as, or in connection with
a tavern, eating place, or other place open to the public), which meets
periodically and may be limited to members.
F.
§ 240-25 WASTEWATER DISCHARGE § 240-25
232:423
FUNERAL HOME OR MORTUARY — An establishment providing
services such as preparing the human dead for burial and arranging
and managing funerals, and may include limited caretaker facilities.
This classification excludes cemeteries, crematoriums, and
columbariums.
HEALTH CLUB — A facility for the purpose of physical exercise or
wellness open only to members and guests or open to the public for a
fee. It shall include health and fitness clubs, and specialty fitness uses,
such as yoga studios or cross-fit facilities and may include customary
accessory uses.
MIXED USE DEVELOPMENT — Development including at least one
residential unit and at least one nonresidential use on a single lot; or
development including several nonresidential uses on a single lot.
MUSEUMS — A public or private facility, including an aquarium,
established for preserving and exhibiting artistic, historical, scientific,
natural or man-made objects of interest, designed to be used by
members of the public for viewing, with or without an admission
charge. Such activity may include, as an accessory use, the sale of
memorabilia, crafts work and artwork, and the holding of meetings and
social events.
OFFICE, DENTAL OR MEDICAL — A building or portion of a building
in which the primary use is the provision of health-care services to
patients or clients by an appointment only. Such services may include
the following: medical, dental, psychiatric, psychological, chiropractic,
dialysis, acupuncture, reflexology, mental health professional, physical
and/or occupational therapy, related medical services, or a laboratory
which provides bacteriological, biological, medical, x-ray, pathological
and similar analytical or diagnostic services to doctors or dentists.
PERFORMING ARTS FACILITY — An enclosed space suitable for a
variety of cultural arts performances, permanently available for the
primary principal use of public performing arts presentations, such
as plays, dances, and concerts, although incidental use for private
meetings, exhibits and presentations shall be permitted. Such space
may also include studios, classrooms, and galleries.
PERSONAL SERVICE ESTABLISHMENT — An establishment engaged
in the provision of frequent or recurrent needed services of a personal
nature. Typical uses include, but are not limited to, barbershop, beauty
shop, dry cleaner, tailor, or other similar services.
RECREATIONAL ESTABLISHMENT — An establishment engaged in
the provision of public recreational services, including bowling and
billiards.
RETAIL, GASOLINE AND/OR DIESEL — A facility where gasoline,
diesel or any other automotive engine fuel is stored only in
underground tanks and offered for sale directly to the public on the
premises. Retail, gasoline and/or diesel shall be subject to the
requirements of § 240-35, Groundwater Protection Overlay Districts.
§ 240-25 BARNSTABLE CODE § 240-25
232:424
§ 240-26. HO Highway Office.
SENIOR LIVING, ASSISTED LIVING — A combination of housing,
ancillary support services and personalized care that is designed to
respond in a homelike setting to the individual needs of adults requiring
help with activities of daily living, but who do not require the skilled
medical care provided in a nursing home.
SENIOR LIVING, NURSING HOMES — A facility, including for the aged
or chronically ill, providing bed-care and in-patient services for persons
requiring regular medical attention, but excluding a facility providing
surgical or emergency medical services and including skilled nursing
care facilities.
VETERINARY HOSPITAL/CLINIC — A facility maintained by or for the
use of a licensed veterinarian in the diagnosis, treatment, or prevention
of animal diseases and injuries. Use as a kennel shall be limited to
short-term boarding and shall be only incidental to such hospital use.
Standards applicable to all uses within the HO Highway Office District:
Naturally occurring vegetation, including trees shall be
incorporated into the design of the site wherever possible, and
natural vegetation shall be retained in landscaped buffer areas
to the maximum extent feasible. The limit of clearing shall be
indicated on plans submitted to site plan review pursuant to Article
IX herein. No clearance of vegetation shall occur prior to
submission to site plan review.
(1)
No nonresidential development shall have principal vehicular
access through a single-family residentially zoned area, or principal
vehicular access via a road located in a single-family residential
zoning district.
(2)
Building and site design shall, in so far as practical, conform to
officially published, local and regional design guidelines applicable
to Cape Cod.
(3)
A.
Principal permitted uses. The following uses are permitted in the HO
Highway Office Zone:
Business, professional and governmental office; bank, including
drive-through facilities.
(1)
Medical, dental office and clinic, including patient treatment
facilities.
(2)
Technological and computer research, data processing; computer
operations.
(3)
(4) Publishing and printing operations.
B.
C. Accessory uses. (Reserved for future use.)
§ 240-25 WASTEWATER DISCHARGE § 240-26
232:425
§ 240-27. S&D Service and Distribution District. [Amended
7-16-1998]
D. Conditional uses. (Reserved for future use.)
E. Special permit uses. (Reserved for future use.)
Bulk regulations. [Amended 7-16-1998 by Order No. 98-133;
3-11-1999 by Order No. 99-056; 3-11-1999 by Order No. 99-058]
Minimum Yard
Setbacks
(feet)
Zoning
Districts
Minimum
Lot Area
(square
feet)
Minimum
Lot
Frontage
(feet)
Minimum
Lot
Width
(feet) Front Side Rear
Maximum
Building
Height
(feet)
Maximum
Floor
Area
Ratio 2
HO 2 acres 200 — 45 15 20 301 0.3
1Or two stories, whichever is lesser.
3Floor area ratio (FAR) is the ratio of gross building square feet to lot area.
NOTE: Front yard landscaped setback from the road lot line: 45 feet. Existing trees and shrubs
shall be retained within the road right-of-way and within the required front yard landscaped
setback. Where natural vegetation cannot be retained, the front yard landscaped setback shall
be landscaped with a combination of grasses, trees and shrubs commonly found on Cape Cod. A
minimum of one street tree with a minimum caliper of three inches shall be provided per 30 feet
of road frontage distributed throughout the front yard setback area. No plantings shall obscure
site at entrance and exit drives and road intersections. All landscaped areas shall be continuously
maintained, substantially in accordance with any site plan approved pursuant to Article IX herein.
(1) Dimensional requirements.
Landscape buffer:
(a) Landscape buffer from side yard: 10 feet.
(b) Landscape buffer from rear yard: 20 feet.
Natural vegetation shall be retained in landscape buffers and
supplemented, or replanted where natural vegetation has been
lost, with similar plant materials common to Cape Cod,
including bushes, trees and ground cover.
(c)
(2)
F.
Principal permitted uses. The following uses are permitted in the S&D
District:
(1) Retail store.
(2) Professional/business office.
A.
§ 240-26 BARNSTABLE CODE § 240-27
232:426
(3) Bank.
(4) Personal service store/shop.
(5) Warehouse and distribution facility.
(6) Servicing, storing and processing of goods in transit.
Facilities for service-type trades, including shops and storage
yards.
(7)
Accessory uses. The following uses are permitted as accessory uses in
the S&D district.
Offices, garages and related facilities for uses listed as principal
permitted uses in Subsection A herein.
(1)
B.
Conditional uses. The following uses are permitted as conditional uses
in the S&D District provided a special permit is first obtained from
the Zoning Board of Appeals subject to the provisions of § 240-125C
herein and subject to the specific standards for such conditional uses
as required in this section:
(1) Full-service restaurants and delicatessens.
Kennels as defined in MGL Ch. 140, § 136A, or other similar
facilities for the breeding, boarding, sale or training and related
treatment of common domestic pets subject to the following:
The Board may impose reasonable conditions, including
without limitation, measures for security and the reduction or
containment of noise so as to render such uses as inoffensive
as practicable.
(a)
(2)
Windmills and other devices for the conversion of wind energy to
electrical or mechanical energy, but only as an accessory use
(3)
Public or private regulation golf courses subject to the provisions
of § 240-11C(2) herein.
(4)
C.
D. Special permit uses. (Reserved for future use.)
Bulk regulations.
Minimum Yard
Setbacks (feet)
Zoning
Districts
Minimum
Lot Area
(square
feet)
Minimum
Lot
Frontage
(feet)
Minimum
Lot
Width
(feet) Front Side Rear
Maximum
Building
Height
(feet)
Maximum
Lot
Coverage
as % of
Lot Area
S&D 43,560 20 160 60 25 40 301 25
E.
§ 240-27 WASTEWATER DISCHARGE § 240-27
232:427
§ 240-28. SD-1 Service and Distribution District.
1Or two stories, whichever is lesser.
NOTE: Front yard landscaped setback from the road lot line:
S &D: 20 feet, 60 feet from Route 28.
Existing trees and shrubs shall be retained within the road right-of-way and within the required
front yard landscaped setback and supplemented with other landscape materials, in accordance
with accepted landscape practices. Where natural vegetation cannot be retained, the front
yard landscaped setback shall be landscaped with a combination of grasses, trees and shrubs
commonly found on Cape Cod. A minimum of one street tree with a minimum caliper of three
inches shall be provided per 30 feet of road frontage distributed throughout the front yard
setback area. No plantings shall obscure site at entrance and exit drives and road intersections.
All landscaped areas shall be continuously maintained, substantially in accordance with any site
plan approved pursuant to Article IX herein. [Amended 3-11-1999 by Order No. 99-056]
Principal permitted uses. The following uses listed in Subsection A(1)
through (9) below are permitted in the SD-1 Service and Distribution
District, provided that no operation shall result in the treatment,
generation, storage or disposal of hazardous materials, except as
follows: very small quantity generators; waste oil retention facilities for
retailers of motor oil required and operated in compliance with MGL
Ch. 21, § 52A; oil on site for heating of a structure or to supply an
emergency generator.
(1) Medical, dental offices, laboratory services, treatment facilities.
(2) All other business, governmental and professional offices.
(3) Bank.
Personal service business including but not limited to the following:
barber, beauty shop, dry-cleaning pickup service, shoe repair, tailor
and dressmaker.
(4)
(5) Mortuary or funeral home.
Research and development, technological and computer research,
software development and data processing including computer
operations services.
(6)
(7) Publishing and printing establishments.
(8) Boat sales and storage.
Contractor service establishments:
Wholesale sales and distribution of building materials
including plumbing, carpentry, lumber, electrical, heating and
air conditioning, and other similar service or repair businesses;
(a)
(9)
A.
§ 240-27 BARNSTABLE CODE § 240-28
232:428
associated showrooms and sales/display space customarily
accessory to such uses; and
Landscaping, construction and site preparation, and other
similar service businesses, provided that all outdoor storage
of building materials, trucks and landscaping equipment and
materials, are screened from view from Route 28 and Old Post
Road.
(b)
B. Accessory uses. (Reserved for future use.)
Conditional uses. (Reserved for future use.)
Retail store, provided that Zoning Board of Appeals finds that:
The proposed business is a low- to average-volume traffic
generator, not to include a high-volume traffic generator such
as a convenience store. The applicant shall provide the Zoning
Board of Appeals with traffic data including a comparison with
trip generation rates for different types of retail uses, from
the Institute of Transportation Engineers "Trip Generation
Manual."
(a)
(1)
Full-service restaurant, subject to the following conditions:
Food is served to customers at tables by waitpersons, except
that the Zoning Board of Appeals may permit buffet style
dining;
(a)
(b) Approximately 85% of food is consumed on the premises;
(c) Bar seats or places do not exceed 15% of restaurant seats;
(d) Entertainment shall be limited to nonamplified dinner music;
No drive-in or outdoor take-out counter facilities shall be
permitted; and
(e)
(f) Access shall be from Industry Road or Old Post Road.
(2)
C.
D. Special permit uses. (Reserved for future use.)
E. Bulk regulations (dimensional requirements).
§ 240-28 WASTEWATER DISCHARGE § 240-28
232:429
§ 240-29. SCCRCOD Senior Continuing Care Retirement Community
Overlay District.56 [Added 6-21-2007 by Order No. 2007-160;
amended 2-28-2008 by Order No. 2008-057]
§ 240-29.1. Purpose. [Added 6-21-2007 by Order No. 2007-160;
amended 2-28-2008 by Order No. 2008-057]
The purpose of this section is to encourage the development of residential
communities designed to offer shelter, convenience, services and personal
medical care, including nursing facility services, to senior persons while
providing adequate and economical provision of streets, utilities and public
spaces and preserving the natural and scenic qualities of the open areas.
These facilities shall offer a continuum of care, ranging from independent
living to assisted living and nursing home care that reflects the changing
needs of their residents.
Minimum Yard
Setbacks
Zoning
Districts
Minimum
Lot Area
(square
feet)
Minimum
Lot
Frontage
(feet)
Minimum
Lot
Width
(feet)
Front
(feet)
Side
(feet)
Rear
(feet)
Maximum
Building
Height
(feet)
Maximum
Floor
Area
Ratio 2
Retail/All
Other
SD-1 43,560 150 — 45 15 20 301 0.25/0.30
NOTES:
1 Or two stories, whichever is lesser.
2 Floor area ratio (FAR) is the ratio of gross building square feet to lot area.
Front yard landscaped setback from the road right-of-way: 20 feet, 45 feet from Route 28.
Existing trees and shrubs shall be retained within the road right-of-way and within the
required front yard landscaped setback and supplemented with other landscape materials, in
accordance with accepted landscape practices. Where natural vegetation cannot be retained,
the front yard landscaped setback shall be landscaped with a combination of grasses, trees
and shrubs commonly found on Cape Cod. A minimum of one street tree with a minimum
caliper of three inches shall be provided per 30 feet of road frontage distributed throughout
the front yard setback area. No plantings shall obscure site at entrance and exit drives and
road intersections. All landscaped areas shall be continuously maintained, substantially in
accordance with any site plan approved pursuant to Article IX herein. [Added 7-15-1999]
56.Editor's Note: Former § 240-29, MA-1 Business District, as amended, was repealed
7-14-2005 by Order No. 2005-100. The specific requirements for the SCCRCOD District are
found in §§ 240-29.1 through 240-29.11.
§ 240-28 BARNSTABLE CODE § 240-29.2
232:430
§ 240-29.2. Definitions. [Added 6-21-2007 by Order No. 2007-160;
amended 2-28-2008 by Order No. 2008-057]
As used in this § 240-29, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
APPLICANT — The person or persons, including a corporation or other legal
entity, who applies for approval of a Senior Continuing Care Retirement
Community Overlay District (SCCRCOD) hereunder. The applicant must
own, or be the beneficial owner of, all the land included in the proposed
SCCRCOD, or have authority from the owner(s) to act for the owner (s) or
hold an option or contract duly executed by the owner(s) and the applicant
giving the latter the right to acquire the land to be included in the site.
ASSISTED-LIVING UNITS — Residential living units in which supportive
services are offered for individuals who need assistance in activities of daily
living.
BUILDING HEIGHT — Building height shall be measured as the vertical
distance from the grade plane to the average height of the highest roof
plane that also has the highest ridgeline.
BUILDING STORY — The vertical distance from top to top of two successive
tiers of beams or finished floor surfaces; and, for the topmost story, from the
top of the floor finish to the top of the ceiling joists or, where there is not a
ceiling, to the top of the roof rafters.
CONTINUING CARE RETIREMENT COMMUNITY — A facility which may
include a wide range of housing types including studio, one-, two-, and
three-bedroom apartments, townhouses, duplexes, clusters or single-family
homes and which offers a continuum of services ranging from in-home
services to on-site nursing home care. The facility shall include independent
living units, assisted living units and skilled nursing home facilities. The
facility may include accessory uses for the benefit of the residents which
accessory uses are subordinate and incidental to the continuing care
retirement community as determined by the Town of Barnstable Planning
Board. Other than nursing home beds, the facility shall meet the Town's
Inclusionary Ordinance, Chapter 9 of the Barnstable Code, requiring that
10% of the units be affordable as "affordable" is currently defined under
Chapter 9, with the exception that required affordable units may be
provided off-site. In the event that off-site units are allowed, the applicant
shall provide such units in accordance with § 240-29.3 below.
GRADE PLANE — A reference plane representing the average of the
finished ground level adjoining the building at all exterior walls. The
reference plane shall be established by using the lowest points of grade
within the area between the building and a point six feet from the building.
SENIOR PERSON — Person aged 55 or older or in the case of a couple,
one spouse must be over the age of 55. It may include a developmentally
disabled adult person under the age of 55.
§ 240-29.2 WASTEWATER DISCHARGE § 240-29.2
232:431
SPECIAL PERMIT GRANTING AUTHORITY — For the purposes of this
section, the Barnstable Planning Board shall be the special permit granting
authority.
NURSING OR CONVALESCENT HOME — Any dwelling or building with
sleeping rooms for people who are housed or lodged with meals and nursing
care for hire, as licensed by the Massachusetts Department of Public Health
under MGL c. 111 §§ 71 through 73, as amended.
VISITABILITY — Shall mean that a dwelling unit has no steps between the
exterior walking surface adjacent to the unit and the interior primary floor
level of the unit; that at least one egress door from the unit be at least three
feet wide; that all primary floor passage doors in the unit are at least two
feet eight inches wide; and that at least one toilet room be located on the
primary floor of the unit.
§ 240-29.3. Description of district. [Added 6-21-2007 by Order No.
2007-160; amended 2-28-2008 by Order No. 2008-057]
The SCCRCOD is an overlay district that allows a continuing care
retirement community as a use by special permit and which overlay district
may be superimposed on any parcel(s) of five acres or more of contiguous
upland in any zoning district deemed appropriate as determined by the
Town of Barnstable Planning Board. Where the SCCRCOD authorizes uses
not otherwise allowed in the underlying district, the provisions of the
SCCRCOD shall control. In the event that off-site affordable units are
allowed, such units are not required to meet the definition of a "continuing
care retirement community" but must meet the following criteria: The
number of required affordable units shall be increased to a number not less
than 12% of the total proposed market rate units on-site plus not less than
12% of any additional market rate units proposed off site.
§ 240-29.4. Location. [Added 6-21-2007 by Order No. 2007-160;
amended 2-28-2008 by Order No. 2008-057]
The SCCRCOD is to be shown on the Official Zoning Map of the Town of
Barnstable.
§ 240-29.5. Concept plan. [Added 6-21-2007 by Order No. 2007-160;
amended 2-28-2008 by Order No. 2008-057]
Prior to the rezoning of any property for inclusion in the SCCRCOD and as
part of a petition for such rezoning, a schematic plan, called for purposes
of this section, a "concept plan," shall be filed by the applicant with the
Planning Board for review at least 21 days prior to a regularly scheduled
meeting of the Planning Board. The concept plan shall be consistent with
the provisions of this SCCRCOD Ordinance. In deliberation on approval of
a concept plan, the Planning Board shall give consideration to the Town
of Barnstable Local Comprehensive Plan. The purpose of the concept plan
is to ensure that the overall development scheme is consistent with Town
policies and plans; adequately protects natural resources; provides safe
§ 240-29.2 BARNSTABLE CODE § 240-29.5
232:432
traffic circulation consistent with the adjacent roadway network that also
ensures adequate access to the development; and to ensure that the
development is arranged to provide maximum protection of its residents
from nuisance and hazard.
§ 240-29.6. Map amendment. [Added 6-21-2007 by Order No.
2007-160; amended 2-28-2008 by Order No. 2008-057]
In order to obtain approval of a SCCRCOD the applicant, after first having
received a decision from the Planning Board on the approvability of its
concept plan, must file a petition for the amendment of the Town of
Barnstable Zoning Map for inclusion of the subject parcel(s) within the
SCCRCOD.
§ 240-29.7. Application for special permit. [Added 6-21-2007 by
Order No. 2007-160; amended 2-28-2008 by Order No. 2008-057]
After successful rezoning of a SCCRCOD, an application for a special permit
shall be submitted to the Planning Board within one year from the effective
date of such rezoning. The Planning Board may grant extensions for the
time of filing for a special permit as may be deemed appropriate due
to the size and scope of the proposed development. The application for
special permit shall be submitted on forms furnished by the Planning Board,
accompanied by the following:
The concept plan shall include:
A schematic site development plan showing in general, the location
and square footage of all proposed buildings, general site grading,
parking, landscaping, roads, walkways and accessways, open
space, wetlands, lighting and signage.
(1)
A general breakdown of building types: single-family, two-family,
multifamily and accessory structures, including total number of
bedrooms for the entire development.
(2)
(3) A schematic subdivision plan(s), if applicable.
Specific floor plans, building plans or other detailed construction
documents are not required at the concept plan stage.
(4)
A.
The Barnstable Planning Board will notify the public of the time and
date of the public meeting on the concept plan. Thereafter, the
Barnstable Planning Board shall determine that (i) the concept plan
has been approved; or (ii) the concept plan has been approved subject
to modifications; or (iii) the concept plan has been disapproved. The
Barnstable Planning Board shall provide to the applicant in writing
the reasons for any denial of approval of the concept plan. The
determination of the Barnstable Planning Board of the approvability of
the concept plan shall be the basis for a recommendation to the Town
Council for the rezoning petition.
B.
§ 240-29.5 WASTEWATER DISCHARGE § 240-29.7
232:433
§ 240-29.8. Joint Cape Cod Commission Review. [Added 6-21-2007
by Order No. 2007-160; amended 2-28-2008 by Order No. 2008-057]
A site plan in accordance with the Town of Barnstable site plan review
regulations, §§ 240-98 through 240-105, indicating the planned location
of buildings and their use, off-street parking areas, driveways,
easements, walks, the location, type and height of walls, and the extent
of landscaping or other treatment for the protection of adjacent
properties.
A.
Building plans and elevations for all buildings and structures as may be
required to fully describe the project.
B.
A tabulation of the areas of the proposed site elements (including
footprints and gross floor area), including total number of buildings,
number of bedrooms, accessory structures, parking structures and
surface parking areas (square footage and number of parking spaces)
and stormwater management areas.
C.
Information pertaining to the proposed entity that is to manage the
SCCRCOD and the type of operating agreement contemplated.
D.
If a subdivision is proposed, then all documents as required for the
subdivision shall be reviewed during the special permit process.
E.
A narrative detailing the services to be provided to the residents and
the staff to be employed to provide those services.
F.
G. Description of all proposed accessory structures and uses.
H. Building phasing schedule, if applicable.
Description of any green building construction techniques being used,
including a description of how maximum water and energy efficiencies
will be achieved.
I.
A landscape plan signed and stamped by a Massachusetts certified
landscape architect.
J.
Proposed signage, consistent with the requirements of the underlying
zoning district.
K.
L. Plans detailing provision for wastewater disposal.
Description of any infrastructure improvements that may be necessary
to provide for the project.
M.
Additional information as may be required by the Planning Board as
reasonably necessary to making the determinations required by this
section.
N.
Upon a determination by the Building Commissioner that an application
for site plan review for a development requiring a special permit under
the SCCRCOD constitutes a development of regional impact (DRI)
A.
§ 240-29.7 BARNSTABLE CODE § 240-29.8
232:434
§ 240-29.9. Standards. [Added 6-21-2007 by Order No. 2007-160;
amended 2-28-2008 by Order No. 2008-057]
In order to be eligible for consideration for a special permit, the proposal
must contain parcels included in the SCCRCOD and shall meet all of the
following standards:
under Section 12(h) of the Cape Cod Commission Act, 1990 Mass.
Acts, Ch. 716, a referral shall be made to the Cape Cod Commission,
accompanied by a request that a joint review process of the proposed
development be established between the Cape Cod Commission and the
Planning Board.
The joint review process shall include joint hearings between the
Planning Board and the Cape Cod Commission, as feasible.
B.
Compliance with applicable regulations and standards. In the case of a
subdivision, all plans and development shall comply with all applicable
standards of the Planning Board's Subdivision Rules and Regulations,
including such waivers as may be granted by the Planning Board.
A.
Bulk regulations. For all lots within the SCCRCOD the minimum lot
area shall be 217,800 square feet of contiguous upland. For all lots
and buildings within the SCCRCOD, the density, minimum lot frontage,
property line and road layout setbacks, minimum building height and
number of stories and minimum building separation requirements of
the underlying zoning district shall apply unless the Planning Board
finds that a waiver of any of those requirements is beneficial to create a
SCCRCOD which better preserves open space without creating adverse
environmental or aesthetic impacts or facilitates the delivery of
services to senior persons or provides benefits which outweigh any
detriments or provides sufficient mitigation to offset impacts.
B.
Parking. Parking shall be provided as follows:
SCCRCOD Uses
Minimum Number
of Spaces Guest Spaces
Independent-living
dwelling unit
0.75 per dwelling unit 0.5 per dwelling unit
Assisted-living
dwelling unit
0.5 per dwelling unit 0.5 per dwelling unit
Skilled care facility 0.5 per bed 0.5 per bed
Employee — dwelling
unit administration
0.75 per 5 dwelling
units
N/A
Employee — skilled
care facility
0.5 per bed N/A
C.
Waiver of parking requirements. The Planning Board may waive the
number of parking spaces required for the above-listed uses upon a
finding that the applicant has provided a parking demand analysis
D.
§ 240-29.8 WASTEWATER DISCHARGE § 240-29.9
232:435
that adequately demonstrates alternate parking requirements for the
proposed use or combination of uses.
Parking and loading design standards.
Any above-grade parking or loading facility should be screened
from public view to the extent necessary to eliminate unsightliness.
Screening shall consist of landscape materials, topographic
features, residential buildings or any combination of these. In the
alternative, the parking facility shall treat exterior walls with
architectural features typical of the development it serves.
Aboveground, multilevel parking garages are discouraged.
(1)
(2) Outdoor storage shall not be permitted.
These requirements are in addition to the parking and parking lot
landscaping requirements of the underlying zoning district.
(3)
E.
Visitability. The applicant shall provide that all of the dwelling units
shall be visitable as determined by the SPGA.
F.
Design standards.
All buildings in the layout and design, including landscaping, the
placement of pedestrian sidewalks and parking, shall be an integral
part of the development and have convenient access to and from
adjacent uses.
(1)
Primary landscape treatment shall consist of a combination of
indigenous grasses, trees and shrubs commonly found on Cape Cod
and shall combine with appropriate walks and street surfaces to
provide an attractive development pattern. Planting areas should
be designed to serve as stormwater treatment areas often known
as "rain gardens."
(2)
Existing significant trees and natural vegetation shall be retained
to the maximum extent possible. A minimum of one tree with a
three-inch minimum caliper is required to be planted within the
front setback for every 30 feet of frontage of property.
(3)
All landscaped areas shall be continuously maintained, irrigated,
and organically fertilized.
(4)
All stormwater shall be treated as appropriate and discharged on
site and shall incorporate low-impact techniques for stormwater
discharge.
(5)
Minimum recommended light levels established by the Cape Cod
Commission Technical Bulletin 95-001, DRI Standards and
Submittal Requirements for Exterior Lighting Design shall apply.
Site lighting, security lighting and architectural/landscape lighting
shall provide illumination levels appropriate for the designed
activity without exceeding minimum requirements.
(6)
G.
§ 240-29.9 BARNSTABLE CODE § 240-29.9
232:436
§ 240-29.10. Decision. [Added 6-21-2007 by Order No. 2007-160;
amended 2-28-2008 by Order No. 2008-057]
The Planning Board may grant a special permit for a SCCRCOD where it
makes the following findings:
There shall be an adequate safe and convenient arrangement of
pedestrian circulation facilities, sidewalks, roadways, driveways,
off-street parking and loading space. Buildings and vehicular
circulation open spaces shall be arranged so that pedestrians
moving between buildings are not unnecessarily exposed to
vehicular traffic.
(7)
Impact analysis. The applicant shall provide additional data and
analysis requested by the Planning Board to enable the Board to assess
the fiscal, community and environmental impacts of the proposed
development. At its discretion, the Planning Board may impose
reasonable fees upon the applicant for the hiring of outside consultants
and the provisions of MGL c. 44, § 53G, shall apply thereto.
H.
Phasing and period of validity for special permit. The applicant, as
part of the application, may propose a phasing plan identifying the
specific units to be constructed in each phase and stating the reasons
for the request. Said submission shall show the full buildout of the
development. The Planning Board, upon a finding of good cause and of
consistency with the provisions of this section, may approve a phasing
plan that allows the construction of the development to be extended
over a period not to exceed 10 years. Notwithstanding anything to the
contrary contained in § 240-125C(3), as long as the applicant proceeds
with construction continuously in compliance with the approved
phasing plan or with any modifications thereto approved by the
Planning Board, the period of validity for the special permit shall be the
same as the period of the phasing plan. [Added 6-18-2009 by Order
No. 2009-139]
I.
The SCCRCOD complies with all applicable Subdivision Rules and
Regulations,57 except as they may be waived by the Board.
A.
The SCCRCOD does not cause substantial detriment to the
neighborhood.
B.
The SCCRCOD is consistent with the Town of Barnstable Local
Comprehensive Plan.
C.
The SCCRCOD provides an effective and unified treatment of the
development on the project site making appropriate provision for
environmental protection, the preservation of scenic features, sensitive
habitat and other amenities of the site and the surrounding areas.
D.
57.Editor's Note: See Ch. 801, Subdivision Regulations.
§ 240-29.9 WASTEWATER DISCHARGE § 240-29.10
232:437
§ 240-29.11. Transferability. [Added 6-21-2007 by Order No.
2007-160; amended 2-28-2008 by Order No. 2008-057]
The special permit for the SCCRCOD shall be transferable upon the prior
written approval of the Planning Board.
§ 240-30. Medical Marijuana Overlay District.58 [Added 2-6-2014 by
Order No. 2014-050]
The SCCRCOD is planned and developed to harmonize with any existing
or proposed development in the surrounding area.
E.
The applicant has provided mitigation that sufficiently addresses the
impacts of the SCCRCOD.
F.
The SCCRCOD provides services which are tailored to the needs of
senior persons and may include meals, housekeeping, transportation,
health care services and personal care assistance, and the benefits of
the development for the residents and the community outweighs the
detriments.
G.
The SCCRCOD complies with the standards established in §§ 240-29.9
and 240-29.3 except as they may be waived by the Board based upon
a finding that the waivers granted do not jeopardize health and safety
and do not diminish environmental and aesthetic protections. Nothing
herein shall allow the Board to waive the minimum twelve-percent offsite
inclusionary housing requirement.
H.
Where a phasing plan has been proposed, that the applicant has
demonstrated good cause to phase the development and that the
approved phasing plan is consistent with the provisions of the
SCCRCOD. [Added 6-18-2009 by Order No. 2009-139]
I.
District established. A Medical Marijuana Overlay District is hereby
established, and shall be considered as superimposed over any other
districts established by this chapter, and is shown as an overlay on
the Official Zoning Map established pursuant to § 240-6, Zoning Map,
herein.
A.
Purpose; use.
Purpose. The purpose of the Medical Marijuana Overlay District
is to provide for the limited establishment of registered marijuana
dispensaries as they are authorized pursuant to state regulations
set forth at 105 CMR 725.000, Implementation of an Act for the
Humanitarian Medical Use of Marijuana. Given that registered
marijuana dispensaries shall be limited in number and strictly
regulated by the Massachusetts Department of Public Health, these
zoning regulations intend to permit them where there is access
(1)
B.
58.Editor's Note: Former § 240-30, MA-2 Business District, as amended, was repealed
7-14-2005 by Order No. 2005-100.
§ 240-29.10 BARNSTABLE CODE § 240-30
232:438
to both regional roadways and public transportation, where they
may be readily monitored by law enforcement for health and public
safety purposes, and where their impacts are ameliorated by these
locations.
Use. Within the Medical Marijuana Overlay District, a registered
marijuana dispensary that dispenses, cultivates and prepares
marijuana products may be permitted as a conditional use only
within the overlay district, provided a special permit is first
obtained from the Zoning Board of Appeals, subject to the
provisions of § 240-125C herein and subject to the all additional
standards and conditions of this section.
(2)
Special permit granting authority. Within the MMOD, the Zoning Board
of Appeals shall be the special permit granting authority.
C.
Use. Notwithstanding the use limitations of the base zoning district or
any other overlay zoning district, a registered marijuana dispensary
shall be allowed within the Medical Marijuana Overlay District upon the
granting of a special permit, subject to the requirements set forth in
this section. Within the Medical Marijuana Overlay District, and only
within the Medical Marijuana Overlay District, a registered marijuana
dispensary may be permitted, provided that a special permit is first
obtained from the Zoning Board of Appeals, subject to the following
standards and conditions.
D.
Requirements/standards.
Registration. All permitted registered marijuana dispensaries shall
be properly registered with the Massachusetts Department of
Public Health pursuant to 105 CMR 725.100 and shall comply with
all applicable state and local public health regulations and all other
applicable state and local laws, rules and regulations at all times.
No building permit or certificate of occupancy shall be issued for
a registered marijuana dispensary that is not properly registered
with the Massachusetts Department of Public Health.
(1)
Building. A registered marijuana dispensary shall be located only
in a permanent building and not within any mobile facility. All
sales shall be conducted either within the building or by home
deliveries to qualified clients pursuant to applicable state and local
regulations.
(2)
Proximity to residential uses. A medical marijuana treatment
center shall not be allowed within a building containing a
residential use, or upon a lot with a residential use, except an
incidental residential use that may be necessary for RMD security.
(3)
Separation requirements. The site is located at least 1,000 feet
distant from a religious institution/place of religious assembly,
school, day-care center, preschool or afterschool facility or any
facility in which children commonly congregate, or if not located at
(4)
E.
§ 240-30 WASTEWATER DISCHARGE § 240-30
232:439
such a distance, it is determined by the Zoning Board of Appeals
to be sufficiently buffered from such facilities such that its users
will not be adversely impacted by the operation of the registered
marijuana dispensary, but in no case shall the distance be less than
500 feet measured from parcel boundary to parcel boundary. In
no case shall a RMD directly abut another RMD or any medical
marijuana use.
Dimensional requirements. Except where it is explicitly stated
otherwise in this section, Registered marijuana dispensaries shall
conform to the dimensional requirements applicable to
nonresidential uses within the underlying and other overlaying
zoning districts.
(5)
Parking. The required number of parking (both long-term and
short-term) spaces for a registered marijuana dispensary shall be
one space for every 200 square feet of gross floor area for a RMD;
and one space for every 700 square feet of gross floor area for RMD
marijuana infused product manufacturing or marijuana cultivation.
The Board of Appeals shall also rely on the recommendation of site
plan review.
(6)
Loading. The Board of Appeals may require loading bays based on
the recommendation of site plan review and/or based on the needs
of the proposed use.
(7)
Signage. Signage shall not exceed 12 square feet in area, and no
part of the sign shall exceed eight feet above existing average
grade. For other site signage, the requirements of Article VII of
this chapter shall also apply through the underlying zoning district.
The Zoning Board of Appeals may impose additional restrictions on
signage, as appropriate, to mitigate any aesthetic impacts.
(8)
Consistency with registration materials. Plans and information
provided to the Zoning Board of Appeals shall be consistent with
the with the registration materials issued by the Massachusetts
Department of Public Health and any other information and
materials provided to the Massachusetts Department of Public
Health.
(9)
Special permit requirements.
Application requirements. An application to the Zoning Board of
Appeals shall include, at a minimum, the following information:
(a) Complete application form.
Description of activities: A narrative providing information
about the type and scale of all activities that will take place
on the proposed site, including but not limited to cultivating
and processing of marijuana or marijuana infused products
(MIPs), on-site sales, off-site deliveries, site security, hours
(b)
(1)
F.
§ 240-30 BARNSTABLE CODE § 240-30
232:440
of operation, community benefit, distribution of educational
materials, and other programs or activities.
Service area: A scaled map and narrative describing the area
proposed to be served by the registered marijuana dispensary
and the anticipated number of clients that will be served within
that area. This description shall indicate where any other
registered marijuana dispensaries exist or have been proposed
within the expected service area.
(c)
Context map: A scaled map depicting all properties and land
uses within a two-thousand-foot radius of the project site,
whether such uses are located in Barnstable or within
surrounding communities, including but not limited to all
religious institutions/places of religious assembly, schools, daycare
centers, preschool or afterschool facilities or any facilities
in which children commonly congregate.
(d)
Site plan: The proposal is subject to the provisions of Article
IX, Site Plan Review, § 240-102.
(e)
Security plan: The security plan shall be submitted to the Chief
of Police who shall provide written comment to the Board as
to the adequacy or inadequacy of the security provisions and
plans.
(f)
Building elevations and signage: Architectural drawings of all
exterior building facades and all proposed signage, specifying
materials and colors to be used. Perspective drawings and
illustrations of the site from public ways and abutting
properties are recommended but not required.
(g)
Registration materials: Copies of registration materials issued
by the Massachusetts Department of Public Health and any
materials submitted to the Massachusetts Department of
Public Health for the purpose of seeking registration, to
confirm that all information provided to the Zoning Board of
Appeals is consistent with the information provided to the
Massachusetts Department of Public Health.
(h)
Special permit criteria. In granting a special permit for a registered
marijuana dispensary, in addition to the general criteria for
issuance of a special permit as set forth in § 240-125C herein and in
consideration of all application materials submitted and testimony
received, the Zoning Board of Appeals shall find that the following
criteria are met:
The registered marijuana dispensary complies with all
requirements of this section, including but not limited to
Subsections E and F in their entirety.
(a)
(2)
§ 240-30 WASTEWATER DISCHARGE § 240-30
232:441
The registered marijuana dispensary is located to serve an
area that currently does not have reasonable access to medical
marijuana, or if it is proposed to serve an area that is already
served by other registered marijuana dispensaries, it has been
established by the Massachusetts Department of Public Health
that supplemental service is needed.
(b)
The site is designed such that it provides convenient, safe and
secure access and egress for clients and employees arriving
to and leaving from the site using all modes of transportation,
including drivers, pedestrians, cyclists and public
transportation users.
(c)
Traffic generated by client trips, employee trips, and deliveries
to and from the registered marijuana dispensary shall not
create a substantial adverse impact on nearby residential uses.
(d)
Where necessary to shield adjacent uses, the Zoning Board of
Appeals may require buffering by fencing, vegetation or other
screening methods.
(e)
Prohibition on transfer. The special permit shall be issued to the
owner of the Medical marijuana treatment center and shall not
transfer with a change in ownership of the business and/or
property.
(3)
Limitation of approval. A special permit authorizing the
establishment of a registered marijuana dispensary shall be valid
only for the registered entity to which the special permit was
issued, and only for the site on which the registered marijuana
dispensary has been authorized by special permit. If the
registration for a registered marijuana dispensary has been
revoked, transferred to another controlling entity, or relocated to a
different site within the Medical Marijuana Overlay District, a new
special permit shall be required prior to issuance of a certificate of
occupancy.
(4)
Revocation/nonrenewal.
In accordance with 105 CMR 725.100(E), Expiration and
Renewal of Registration, all materials submitted pursuant to
the RMD compliance with that section shall also be submitted
to the Zoning Board of Appeals record file. The Board reserves
the right to hold a public hearing based on a review of the
materials showing inconsistencies with special permit
conditions and/or the requirements and standards of this
section.
(a)
In accordance with 105 CMR 105(O), Requirements Upon
Expiration, Revocation or Voiding of Certificate of Registration
of RMD, should DPH take action under this section, the special
permit shall be null and void.
(b)
(5)
§ 240-30 BARNSTABLE CODE § 240-30
232:442
§ 240-31. (Reserved)59
§ 240-32. IND Limited Industrial District.
Relationship to other laws. Nothing in this section poses an obstacle
to federal enforcement of federal law. Nothing in this law supersedes
Massachusetts law prohibiting the possession, cultivation, transport,
distribution, or sale of marijuana for nonmedical purposes. Nothing
in this law requires the violation of federal law or purports to give
immunity under federal law.
G.
Principal permitted uses.
The following uses are permitted in the IND Limited District:
Warehousing and wholesale distribution facilities of nontoxic
and nonhazardous materials.
(a)
(b) Light manufacturing and assembly facilities.
(c) Research and development facilities.
Professional or business offices, banks, architectural,
engineering and drafting firms, computer operations centers,
recreation facilities, and such sewerage treatment facilities as
may have been allowed by previous Zoning Ordinance.
(d)
(1)
Specifically prohibited are petroleum refineries, landfills, resource
recovery facilities, hotels, motels, restaurants, manufacturing and
processing uses, any use involved in the manufacture, storage,
transportation, disposal or use of toxic or hazardous materials and
any residential use.
(2)
A.
B. Accessory uses. (Reserved for future use.)
Conditional uses. The following uses are permitted as conditional uses
in the IND Limited District, provided that a special permit is first
obtained from the Zoning Board of Appeals subject to the provisions
of § 240-125C herein and subject to the specific standards for such
conditional uses as required in this section:
Windmills and other devices for the conversion of wind energy to
electrical or mechanical energy, but only as an accessory use.
(1)
Public or private regulation golf courses subject to the provisions
of § 240-11C(2) herein.
(2)
C.
D. Special permit uses. (Reserved for future use.)
E. Bulk regulations.
59.Editor's Note: Former § 240-31, B-1 Business District, added 7-19-2001 by Item Nos.
2001-037, 2001-038, 2001-039, was repealed 7-14-2005 by Order No. 2005-100. Said §
240-31, was subsequently repealed again 6-1-2006 by Order No. 2006-136.
§ 240-30 WASTEWATER DISCHARGE § 240-32
232:443
§ 240-33. IND Industrial District.
Minimum Yard
Setbacks
Zoning
Districts
Minimum
Lot Area
(square
feet)
Minimum
Lot
Frontage
(feet)
Minimum
Lot Width
(feet)
Front
(feet)
Side
(feet)
Rear
(feet)
Maximum
Building
Height
(feet)
Maximum
Lot
Coverage
as % of
Lot Area
IND
LTD
90,000 20 200 50 30 30 301 25
NOTES:
1 Or two stories, whichever is lesser.
Special screening standards. In IND Limited Districts a buffer strip
with a minimum depth of 30 feet at the rear and side site lines and a
buffer strip of 50 feet at the front line shall be maintained in existing
ground cover and trees or shall be replanted with native trees, shrubs
and grasses which do not require continued nurturing and watering;
provided, however, that in no instance shall the natural vegetation
coverage on any lot consist of less than 25% of the total lot area. A
maximum of two driveways, each not more than 50 feet wide, shall be
allowed for ingress and egress.
F.
Principal permitted uses.
The following uses are permitted in the IND District:
(a) Any use permitted in the B District.
(b) Lumber, fuel and ice establishments.
(c) Contractors' yards.
(d) Manufacturing and industrial uses.
(e) Any use permitted in the S&D District.
(f) Recreation ice rink facilities.
Sports and recreation facility. [Added 8-17-2017 by Order
No. 2017-165]
(g)
(1)
Specifically prohibited are petroleum refineries, landfills, resource
recovery facilities, sewerage treatment facilities which process and
discharge less than tertiary-treated effluent, and any other use
which involves as a principal activity the manufacture, storage,
use, transportation or disposal of toxic or hazardous materials.
(2)
A.
B. Accessory uses. (Reserved for future use.)
§ 240-32 BARNSTABLE CODE § 240-33
232:444
Conditional uses. The following uses are permitted as conditional uses
in the IND District, provided that a special permit is first obtained from
the Zoning Board of Appeals subject to the provisions of § 240-125C
herein and subject to the specific standards for such conditional uses
as required in this section:
(1) Kennels as provided for in § 240-27C(2) herein.
Windmills and other devices for the conversion of wind energy to
electrical or mechanical energy, but only as an accessory use.
(2)
Public or private regulation golf courses subject to the provisions
of § 240-11C(2) herein.
(3)
C.
D. Special permit uses. (Reserved for future use.)
Bulk regulations. [Amended 8-17-2017 by Order No. 2017-165]
Minimum Yard
Setbacks
(feet)
Zoning
Districts
Minimum
Lot Area
(square
feet)
Minimum
Lot
Frontage
(feet)
Minimum
Lot Width
(feet) Front1 Side2 Rear2
Maximum
Building
Height
(feet)
Maximum
Lot
Coverage
as % of
Lot Area4
IND 90,000 20 200 60 30 30 303 25
1For sports and recreation facilities, outdoor uses (e.g., fields, tracks,
courts and swimming pools, etc.) and their accessory structures with
a footprint of less than 2,000 square feet shall have a minimum front
yard setback of 20 feet; provided however, that for such outdoor uses
which are temporarily (i.e., not more than 182 days) covered by an
air-supported or removable bubble/dome, said temporary bubble/dome
shall have a minimum front yard setback of 15 feet. Retaining walls
(including those used for outdoor climbing) and outdoor field/court
lighting for sports and recreation facilities shall not be subject to these
setbacks.
2For sports and recreation facilities, outdoor uses (e.g., fields, tracks,
courts and swimming pools, etc.) and their accessory structures with
a footprint of less than 2,000 square feet shall have a minimum side
and rear setback of 10 feet; this ten-foot side/rear setback shall also
apply to such outdoor uses which are temporarily (i.e., not more
than 182 days) covered by an air-supported or removable bubble/
dome. Retaining walls (including those used for outdoor climbing) and
outdoor field/court lighting for sports and recreation facilities shall not
be subject to these setbacks.
E.
§ 240-33 WASTEWATER DISCHARGE § 240-33
232:445
§ 240-34. Floodplain District. [Amended 5-22-2014 by Order No.
2014-126]
A Floodplain District is herein established within the Town of Barnstable.
The district includes all special flood hazard areas within the Town
designated as Zone AE, AO, or VE on the Barnstable County Flood Insurance
Rate Map (FIRM) issued by the Federal Emergency Management Agency
(FEMA) for the administration of the National Flood Insurance Program.
The map panels of the Barnstable County FIRM that are wholly or partially
within the Town of Barnstable are Panel Numbers 25001C0532J,
25001C0533J, 25001C0534J, 25001C0537J, 25001C0539J, 25001C0541J,
25001C0542J, 25001C0543J, 25001C0544J, 25001C0551J, 25001C0552J,
25001C0553J, 25001C0554J, 25001C0556J, 25001C0557J, 25001C0558J,
25001C0559J, 25001C0561J, 25001C0562J, 25001C0563J, 25001C0564J,
25001C0566J, 25001C0567J, 25001C0568J, 25001C0569J, 25001C0752J,
25001C0754J, 25001C0756J, 25001C0757J and 5001C0776J, effective date
July 16, 2014. The exact boundaries of the district may be defined by the
one-hundred-year base flood elevations shown on the FIRM and further
defined by the Barnstable County Flood Insurance Study (FIS) report dated
July 16, 2014. The FIRM and FIS report are incorporated herein by
reference and are on file with the Town Clerk, Planning Board, Building
Commissioner, and Engineering Department.
Permits for new construction, alteration of structures, or other development
(any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate, including,
but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling,
grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations), at or below the base
flood elevation as specified with the A and V Zones as determined by
the Flood Insurance Study and designated on the special FEMA Flood
Insurance Rate Maps, shall be approved subject to the following:
3Or two stories, whichever is lesser; except that for sports and
recreation facilities, the maximum building height shall be 55 feet
measured to the highest point on the roof (not including antennas or
similar roof fixtures).
4For sports and recreation facilities, the following outdoor uses shall
not be considered structures included in this calculation: open-air
solar-mounted carports, fields (grass or turf), courts, tracks, swimming
pools, retaining walls, and similar outdoor, open-air features;
additionally, any such outdoor uses which are temporarily (i.e., not
more than 182 days) covered by an air-supported or removable bubble/
dome shall not be included in this calculation.
Special screening requirements. The provisions of § 240-32F herein
shall apply to all uses, except they shall not apply to sports and
recreation facilities. [Amended 8-17-2017 by Order No. 2017-165]
F.
New construction or substantial improvement (repair, construction or
alteration costing 50% or more of the market value of the structure
before improvement, or if damaged, before damage occurred) of
A.
§ 240-33 BARNSTABLE CODE § 240-34
232:446
residential structures shall have the lowest floor (including basement)
elevated to not less than base flood elevations. New construction or
substantial improvement of nonresidential structures shall either be
similarly elevated or, together with attendant utility and sanitary
facilities, be floodproofed to not less than base flood elevations.
Where floodproofing is utilized in accordance with Subsection A herein,
a registered engineer or architect shall certify that the floodproofing
methods are adequate to withstand the flood depths, pressures,
velocities, impact and uplift forces and other factors associated with the
base flood.
B.
Any new construction or substantial improvement to be under taken
within flood areas shall be in accordance with Massachusetts State
Building Code 780 CMR. The Building Commissioner shall review all
proposed development within flood areas to assure that all necessary
permits have been received from those governmental agencies from
which approval is required by federal or state law, including Sec. 404
of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, U.S.C.
§ 1334, and shall obtain and maintain records of elevation and
floodproofing levels for new construction or substantial improvement
within the flood areas.
C.
Any new construction, alteration of structures or other development
which is removed from the A or V Zones by subsequent FEMA Flood
Insurance Rate Map amendments shall only have to meet the
requirements of its new zone designation.
D.
All subdivision proposals and other proposed new developments
greater than 50 lots or five acres, whichever is lesser, shall include
within such proposals base flood elevation data.
E.
Subdivision and development proposals, including utility and drainage
systems, shall assure that they are located and designed to be
consistent with the need to minimize flood damage.
F.
In Zone AE, along watercourses that have not had a regulatory
floodway designated, the best available federal, state, local, or other
floodway data shall be used to prohibit encroachments in floodways
which would result in any increase in flood levels within the community
during the occurrence of the base flood discharge.
G.
In a riverine situation, the Conservation Division Administrator or
designee shall notify the following of any alteration or relocation of
a watercourse: Adjacent Communities, the NFIP State Coordinator,
Massachusetts Department of Conservation and Recreation, 251
Causeway Street, Suite 600-700, Boston, MA 02114-2104, and the NFIP
Program Specialist, Federal Emergency Management Agency, Region I
at 99 High Street, 6th Floor, Boston, MA 02110.
H.
§ 240-34 WASTEWATER DISCHARGE § 240-34
232:447
Within Zone AO on the FEMA Flood Insurance Rate Maps, adequate
drainage paths must be provided around structures on slopes to guide
floodwaters around and away from proposed structures.
I.
No land within areas designated as V (Velocity) Zones on the FEMA
Flood Insurance Rate Maps shall be developed unless such
development is demonstrated by the applicant to be located landward
of the reach of the mean high tide. All new construction and substantial
improvement within the V Zones shall be in full compliance with the
Sate Building Code and shall be certified by a registered professional
engineer or architect that the structure is securely anchored to
adequately anchored pilings or columns in order to withstand velocity
waters and hurricane wave wash.
J.
The following shall be prohibited within flood areas designated as V
Zones:
Any man-made alteration of sand dunes and salt marshes which
might increase the potential for flood damage.
(1)
(2) Use of fill.
(3) Mobile homes.
K.
The Zoning Board of Appeals may authorize exceptions from the flood
regulations of this section by special permit within the flood areas
in accordance with § 240-125 herein, as in any other zoning district,
and may grant special permit exceptions from the requirements of this
section in the case of new structures or substantial improvement to
be erected on a lot contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing
structures and constructed below the base flood elevation, provided
that the following are met:
(1) A showing of good and sufficient cause.
A determination that failure to grant the special permit would
result in exceptional hardship to the applicant.
(2)
A determination that the special permit will not result in increased
flood heights, additional threats to public safety or environment,
extraordinary public expense, or any conflict with requirements in
accordance with Chapter 40A of the Massachusetts General Laws.
(3)
The Zoning Board of Appeals has notified the applicant for the
special permit in writing that the actuarial rates will increase as the
first-floor elevation decreases, and that such construction below
base flood elevation increases risks to life and property.
(4)
Favorable recommendation from the Board of Health on all
structures requiring sewerage disposal and/or water supply.
(5)
L.
Upon the granting of such a special permit or permits, the Zoning
Board of Appeals shall maintain a record of all such special permits
M.
§ 240-34 BARNSTABLE CODE § 240-34
232:448
§ 240-35. Groundwater Protection Overlay Districts. [Added
11-7-1987 by Art. 2; amended 11-4-1989 by Art. 5; 8-19-1993 by
Order No. 93-105]
granted by said Board, including justification for their issuance, and
report such special permits in its annual report to the Flood Insurance
Administrator in accordance with the Housing and Urban Development
Guidelines.
The Zoning Board of Appeals may grant a special permit for the
reconstruction, rehabilitation or restoration of structures listed on the
National Register of Historic Places or the State Inventory of Historic
Places or the Old King's Highway Regional Historic District without
regard to the procedures set forth in Subsection J herein.
N.
Purpose. The purpose of this section is to protect the public health,
safety, and welfare by encouraging nonhazardous, compatible land uses
within groundwater recharge areas.
A.
Districts established. In order to carry out the purpose of this section,
the following overlay districts are hereby established, and shall be
considered as superimposed over any other district established by this
chapter:
AP Aquifer Protection Overlay District
GP Groundwater Protection Overlay District
WP Well Protection Overlay District
The GP Groundwater Protection Overlay District is based on Zone
11 delineations to existing, proven future, and proposed future
public supply wells, as determined by Geraghty and Miller, Inc.,
and as shown on Figure 44, in their report entitled "Groundwater
Conditions, Town of Barnstable, Massachusetts, Volumes I of III;
together with Appendices A-D and E-H in Volumes II of III and III of
III," dated November 1993 and "Corrections, Zone II Delineations
for Public Water Supply Wells, Town of Barnstable, Massachusetts,"
dated December 1993; except that the GP Groundwater Protection
Overlay District (Zone II), to Barnstable Fire District wells 3 and
4, is delineated by Whitman and Howard, Inc. in a report entitled
"Report on Prolonged Pumping Test and Zone II Delineation at
Test Well Site 8-90, Barnstable Fire District, Barnstable,
Massachusetts," dated October 1991. The Zone II delineations to
existing and proven future wells have been approved by the
Department of Environmental Protection, Executive Office of
Environmental Affairs, Commonwealth of Massachusetts, in a letter
to the Town of Barnstable dated March 13, 1996.
(1)
The WP Well Protection Overlay District is based on a five-year
time of travel zone to existing, proven future and potential future
public supply wells, delineated by Geraghty and Miller Inc., in
(2)
B.
§ 240-34 WASTEWATER DISCHARGE § 240-35
232:449
reports referenced above, except that the WP Zone to Barnstable
Fire District Well No. 2 is delineated by Earth Tech, consultant
to Barnstable Fire District, summarized in a letter and a map to
the district dated May 13, 1997. The WP Well Protection Overlay
District to Barnstable Fire District 2 is that portion of the five-year
time of travel zone located within the GP Groundwater Protection
Overlay District (Zone 11).
The AP Aquifer Protection Overlay District consists of all areas of
the Town, except those areas within the GP Groundwater and WP
Well Protection Overlay Districts. The reports, letters and maps are
on file with the Town Clerk. [Amended 9-17-1998 by Order No.
99-012]
(3)
Overlay Districts Map. The overlay districts established by this section
(the GP Groundwater Protection District; the WP Well Protection
Overlay District; and the AP Aquifer Protection Overlay District) are
shown on the Official Zoning Map, § 240-6A, Identification of Zoning
Map. [Amended 9-17-1998 by Order No. 99-012]
C.
District boundaries. Where the overlay district boundaries divide a lot,
each portion of that lot shall be subject to all the regulations applicable
to the district in which it is located. [Amended 9-17-1998 by Order
No. 99-012]
D.
AP Aquifer Protection Overlay District regulations.
Permitted uses. The following uses are permitted in the AP Aquifer
Protection Overlay District:
Any use permitted in the underlying zoning districts, except for
those uses specifically prohibited by Subsection E(2) herein.
(a)
(1)
Prohibited uses. The following uses are prohibited in the AP Aquifer
Protection Overlay District:
(a) Any use prohibited in the underlying zoning districts.
(2)
E.
GP Groundwater Protection Overlay District regulations.
Permitted uses. The following uses are permitted in the GP
Groundwater Protection Overlay District:
Any use allowed in the underlying zoning districts, except
those uses specifically prohibited in Subsection F(2) herein:
(a)
(1)
Prohibited uses. The following uses are prohibited in the GP
Groundwater Protection Overlay District:
(a) Any use prohibited in the underlying zoning districts.
(b) Landfills and open dumps as defined in 310 CMR 19.006.
(2)
F.
§ 240-35 BARNSTABLE CODE § 240-35
232:450
Junkyards, salvage yards and automobile graveyards, as
defined in MGL Ch. 140B, § 1.60
(c)
Mining of land, removal of sand and gravel, and quarrying of
other raw materials.
(d)
The removal of soil, loam, sand, gravel and other mineral
substances to within four feet of the historic high-water mark
unless the substances removed are redeposited within 45 days
and the final grade exceeds four feet above the historic highwater
mark, and except for excavations for the foundations of
buildings and structures and the installation of utilities.
(e)
(f) Underground fuel storage tanks.61
Storage for resale of heating fuels, including but not limited to,
oil, coal, gas and kerosene.
(g)
Sewage treatment plant, disposal works, or small package
treatment facility subject to 314 CMR 5.00, except for the
following:
The replacement or repair of an existing facility that will
not result in a design capacity greater than the design
capacity of the existing system(s);
[1]
Treatment works approved by the Department of
Environmental Protection designed for the treatment of
contaminated ground or surface waters; and
[2]
Sewage treatment works including package treatment
facilities, which are owned and operated by the Town of
Barnstable, and located in areas with existing water
quality problems attributable to current septic systems
where there will be a net improvement in water quality
with the installation of the treatment facility.
[3]
(h)
(i) Commercial feeding of livestock.
(j) Storage of road salt or other deicing materials.
(k) Metal plating, finishing and polishing.
(l) Chemical and bacteriological laboratories.
(m) Boat, motor vehicle and aircraft cleaning, service and repair.
(n) Dry-cleaning processing establishments.
(o) Furniture stripping, painting and refinishing.
60.Editor's Note: See Ch. 502, Junk Dealers.
61.Editor's Note: See Ch. 326, Fuel and Chemical Storage Systems.
§ 240-35 WASTEWATER DISCHARGE § 240-35
232:451
Any other use which generates, treats, stores or disposes of
hazardous waste that are subject to MGL Ch. 21C and 310
MCR 30.00, except for the following uses:
Very small quantity generators as defined by 310 CMR
30.00;
[1]
Waste oil retention facilities for retailers of motor oil
required and operated in compliance with MGL Ch. 21,
§ 52A.
[2]
Treatment works approved by the Department of
Environmental Protection designed in accordance with
314 CMR 5.00, for the treatment of contaminated ground
or surface waters.
[3]
Household hazardous waste collection centers or events
operated according to 310 CMR 30.390.
[4]
(p)
(q) Landfilling of sludge and septic as defined in 310 CMR 32.05.
Storage of sludge and septage, as defined in 310 CMR 32.05,
unless in compliance with 310 CMR 32.30 and 310 CMR 32.41
(r)
Storage of animal manures unless protected from the elements
and contained in a structure which prevents leachate from
contaminating groundwater, in accordance with all the
requirements of the United States Soil Conservation Service.
(s)
Stockpiling and disposal of snow and ice removed from
highways and streets located outside of the GP and WP
Districts which contains sodium chloride, calcium chloride,
chemically treated abrasives or other chemicals used for ice
and snow removal.
(t)
Storage of liquid petroleum products of any kind, except those
incidental to:
Normal household use and outdoor maintenance or the
heating of a structure;
[1]
Waste oil retention facilities required by MGL Ch. 21,
§ 52A;
[2]
Emergency generators required by statute, rule or
regulation;
[3]
Treatment works approved by the Department designed
in accordance with 314 CMR 5.00 for the treatment of
contaminated ground or surface waters;
[4]
(u)
§ 240-35 BARNSTABLE CODE § 240-35
232:452
and provided that such storage is either in a freestanding
container within a building or in a freestanding container
above ground level with protection adequate to contain
a spill the size of the container's total storage capacity;
however, replacement of existing tanks or systems for
the keeping, dispensing or storing of gasoline is allowed
consistent with state and local requirements; and
Any other use which involves as a principal activity or use
the generation, storage, use, treatment, transportation or
disposal of hazardous materials.
[5]
Storage of commercial fertilizers, as defined in MGL c 128,
§ 64, unless such storage is within a structure designed and
engineered to prevent escape or transport of commercial
fertilizers to the groundwater under any circumstances.
[Added 1-17-2013 by Order No. 2013-001]
(v)
Lot coverage. Unless the applicant demonstrates that all runoff
is recharged on site, no more than 15% or 2,500 square feet,
whichever is greater, of the total area of any lot shall be rendered
impervious by the installation of buildings, structures and paved
surfaces. If all recharge is disposed of on site, no more than 50%
of the total upland area of any lot shall be made impervious by
the installation of buildings, structures, and paved surfaces. For
the purposes of this section, a temporary (i.e., not more than 182
days) air-supported or removable bubble/dome over a sports and
recreation facility’s outdoor use (e.g., outdoor field, track, court,
and swimming pool) shall not be considered a building or structure.
[Amended 8-17-2017 by Order No. 2017-165]
(3)
Site clearing. A minimum of 30% of the total upland area of any
lot shall be retained in its natural state. This shall not prevent
the removal of dead, diseased or damaged trees. For sports and
recreation facilities, the site clearing/natural state requirements
shall not apply where the proposed stormwater management
system will be designed and constructed to provide a minimum
water quality volume treatment equal to one inch times the total
impervious area of the post-development site; and to provide
treatment to remove at least 44% total suspended solids prior
to discharge to the infiltration system. [Amended 8-17-2017 by
Order No. 2017-165]
Additionally, a long-term operations and maintenance plan
shall be developed and implemented to ensure that stormwater
management systems function as designed. At a minimum, the
plan shall include:
[1] Stormwater management system(s) owners;
(a)
(4)
§ 240-35 WASTEWATER DISCHARGE § 240-35
232:453
The party or parties responsible for operation and
maintenance, including how future property owners will
be notified of the presence of the stormwater management
system and the requirement for proper operation and
maintenance;
[2]
The routine and nonroutine maintenance tasks to be
undertaken after construction is complete and a schedule
for implementing those tasks;
[3]
A plan that is drawn to scale and shows the location of all
stormwater BMPs in each treatment train along with the
discharge point;
[4]
[5] A description and delineation of public safety features; and
[6] An estimated operations and maintenance budget.
The plan shall be subject to review and approval by the
Director of Public Works as a condition of site plan review
approval. stormwater operation and maintenance reports
documenting compliance with the plan shall be submitted
annually to the Director of Public Works and Director of
Planning and Development.
(b)
WP Well Protection Overlay District regulations. [Amended 8-19-1993
by Order No. 93-105]
Permitted uses. The following uses are permitted in the WP Well
Protection Overlay District:
Any use allowed in the underlying zoning districts, except
those specifically prohibited in Subsection G(2) herein:
(a)
(1)
Prohibited uses. The following uses are prohibited in the WP Well
Protection Overlay District:
(a) Any use prohibited in the underlying zoning districts.
(b) All uses prohibited in Subsection F(2) herein.
Parking and/or storage of transport vehicles for fuel, including
but not limited to oil, coal and gas.
(c)
Parking and/or storage of transport vehicles for toxic and/or
hazardous substances.
(d)
Any use which uses, generates or stores, including racking for
resale, toxic or hazardous substances, totaling at any one time
more than 50 gallons liquid volume or 25 pounds dry weight.
(e)
(2)
Lot coverage. Unless the applicant demonstrates that all runoff
is recharged on site, no more than 15% or 2,500 square feet,
whichever is greater, of the total area of any lot shall be rendered
(3)
G.
§ 240-35 BARNSTABLE CODE § 240-35
232:454
impervious by the installation of buildings, structures and paved
surfaces. If all recharge is disposed on on site, no more than 50%
of the total upland area of any lot shall be made impervious by
the installation of buildings, structures, and paved surfaces. For
the purposes of this section, a temporary (i.e., not more than 182
days) air-supported or removable bubble/dome over a sports and
recreation facility’s outdoor use (e.g., outdoor field, track, court,
and swimming pool) shall not be considered a building or structure.
[Amended 8-17-2017 by Order No. 2017-165]
Site clearing. A minimum of 30% of the total upland area of any
lot shall be retained in its natural state. This shall not prevent
the removal of dead, diseased or damaged trees. For sports and
recreation facilities, the site clearing/natural state requirements
shall not apply where the proposed stormwater management
system will be designed and constructed to provide a minimum
water quality volume treatment equal to one inch times the total
impervious area of the post-development site; and to provide
treatment to remove at least 44% total suspended solids prior
to discharge to the infiltration system. [Amended 8-17-2017 by
Order No. 2017-165]
Additionally, a long-term operations and maintenance plan
shall be developed and implemented to ensure that stormwater
management systems function as designed. At a minimum, the
plan shall include:
[1] Stormwater management system(s) owners;
The party or parties responsible for operation and
maintenance, including how future property owners will
be notified of the presence of the stormwater management
system and the requirement for proper operation and
maintenance;
[2]
The routine and nonroutine maintenance tasks to be
undertaken after construction is complete and a schedule
for implementing those tasks;
[3]
A plan that is drawn to scale and shows the location of all
stormwater BMPs in each treatment train along with the
discharge point;
[4]
[5] A description and delineation of public safety features; and
[6] An estimated operations and maintenance budget.
(a)
The plan shall be subject to review and approval by the
Director of Public Works as a condition of site plan review
approval. stormwater operation and maintenance reports
documenting compliance with the plan shall be submitted
(b)
(4)
§ 240-35 WASTEWATER DISCHARGE § 240-35
232:455
§ 240-36. RPOD Resource Protection Overlay District. [Added
10-26-2000]
annually to the Director of Public Works and Director of
Planning and Development.
Purpose.
The purpose of this section is to create a Resource Protection
Overlay District overlaying residential zoning districts, and, in part,
the Groundwater Protection Overlay District. The boundaries of
the Resource Protection Overlay District shall include the recharge
areas to the Centerville River, Popponessett and Shoestring Bays,
and the Three Bays area of Cotuit and Osterville, so-called,
together with areas dependent upon private well water supplies,
and shall be as shown on the Barnstable Zoning Map as described
in Subsection C below. When regulations are in conflict, the more
restrictive regulation shall apply.
(1)
The Resource Protection Overlay District implements the
Barnstable Local Comprehensive Plan, adopted by the Barnstable
Town Council, October 30, 1997, and approved by the Cape Cod
Commission, February 12, 1998. The purposes of the Resource
Protection Overlay District include:
To reduce nitrogen contamination by reducing impacts from
septic systems, fertilizers, and runoff from impervious
surfaces, which contamination adversely affects groundwater,
ponds and freshwater bodies, and south coastal marine
embayments.
(a)
To reduce nitrogen loading to groundwater, surface water and
coastal embayments to prevent deterioration of water quality,
destruction of bottom habitat, loss of fin fish and shellfish
habitat, closure of swimming areas, and other adverse
environmental and economic impacts.
(b)
To increase protection of groundwater quality in areas where
no public wastewater treatment and no public water supply
is provided; to ensure protection of private drinking water
wells; to protect private drinking water wells from adverse
impacts in areas of varying soil conditions that are vulnerable
to contamination of groundwater due to environmental
conditions such as impervious soils, high groundwater levels
or steep slopes; and to protect private wells from impacts from
adjacent road drainage systems.
(c)
To reduce development potential. The Barnstable Local
Comprehensive Plan identifies the potential for 36% more
residential growth and a shortfall in public facilities to service
that additional residential development. Potential shortfalls in
(d)
(2)
A.
§ 240-35 BARNSTABLE CODE § 240-36
232:456
§ 240-37. Dock and Pier Overlay District. [Added 2-1-2001]
public services include inadequate roads, lack of capacity in
public wastewater treatment facilities, lack of options for
public water supply development, and lack of capacity of
schools and recreational facilities.
Districts established. In order to implement the purpose of this section,
the Resource Protection Overlay District is hereby established, and
shall be superimposed over existing residential zoning districts
established by this chapter, and as they may be amended from time to
time.
B.
Overlay Districts Map. The boundaries of the Resource Protection
Overlay District established by this section are shown on the Official
Zoning Map, § 240-6A, Identification of Zoning Map, as amended with
a file date of October 26, 2000, and a title of "Resource Protection
Overlay District."
C.
Resource Protection Overlay District regulations. Within the Resource
Protection Overlay District, the minimum lot area requirement of the
bulk regulations in all residential zoning districts shall be 87,120
square feet.
D.
Purpose.
The purpose of this section is to protect the general public interest
in, and access to, the public tidelands of the commonwealth by
creating a Dock and Pier Overlay District overlaying residential
zoning districts. The boundaries of the Dock and Pier Overlay
District shall include an area along the western and northerly
shores of Cotuit Bay from Loop Beach to Handy Point, and shall be
as shown on the Barnstable Zoning Map as described in Subsection
C below. If the provisions of this amendment conflict with any other
provisions of this chapter, the more restrictive provisions shall
apply.
(1)
The Dock and Pier Overlay District implements the Barnstable
Local Comprehensive Plan, adopted by the Barnstable Town
Council on October 30, 1997, and approved by the Cape Cod
Commission on February 12, 1998. The purposes of the Dock and
Pier Overlay District include:
Maintaining public access along the shore and to shellfish and
shellfish beds, whether existing or potential, for the purposes
allowed by law (Strategy 2.2.6.1.1);
(a)
Maintaining safe, open waters for recreational pursuits,
including swimming, power boating, rowing, rowing
instruction, sailing, sailing instruction, sailboat racing, and
kayaking (Goal 2.2.4); and
(b)
(2)
A.
§ 240-36 WASTEWATER DISCHARGE § 240-37
232:457
§ 240-37.1. Recreational Shellfish Area and Shellfish Relay Area
Dock and Pier Overlay District. [Added 4-3-2008 by Order No.
2008-091; amended 10-7-2010 by Order No. 2010-159]
Protecting and retaining the natural open character and scenic
vistas of the seacoast and water (Policy 2.2.6.2).
(c)
Establishment of district.
In order to implement the purposes of this section, the Dock and
Pier Overlay District is hereby established and shall be considered
as superimposed over any other districts established by this
chapter as amended from time to time.
(1)
B.
Overlay District Map. The boundaries of the Dock and Pier Overlay
District established by this section are shown on the Official Zoning
Map, § 240-6A, Identification of Zoning Map, as amended with a file
date of August 30, 2000.
C.
Prohibition. Within the Dock and Pier Overlay District, the construction
and/or installation of docks and piers is prohibited.
D.
Reestablishment of damaged or destroyed nonconforming docks or
piers. The reestablishment of a lawful preexisting nonconforming dock
or pier which has been destroyed or damaged by fire, acts of nature
or other catastrophe shall be permitted pursuant to § 240-95,
Reestablishment of damaged or destroyed nonconforming use or
building or structure. The redeployment of a lawful preexisting
nonconforming seasonal dock or pier is permitted.
E.
Expansion of existing docks or pier. For the purposes of Article VIII,
Nonconformities, the expansion of an existing dock or pier located
within the Dock and Pier Overlay District shall be deemed to be
substantially detrimental and shall be prohibited.
F.
Purpose.
The purpose of this section is to protect the general public's
interest in the recreational harvesting of shellfish by creating a
Recreational Shellfish Area and Shellfish Relay Area Dock and Pier
Overlay District within said overlay zoning district.
(1)
The purposes of the Recreational Shellfish Area and Shellfish Relay
Area Dock and Pier Overlay District include:
Maintaining public access along the shore and to shellfish and
shellfish beds, whether existing or potential, for the purposes
allowed by law.
(a)
Prohibiting docks and piers in mapped portions of the coastal
waters of Cotuit Bay, North Bay, West Bay, Lewis Bay and
Barnstable Harbor designated as a Recreational Shellfish Area
or Shellfish Relay Area.
(b)
(2)
A.
§ 240-37 BARNSTABLE CODE § 240-37.1
232:458
Establishment of district. The boundaries of the Recreational Shellfish
Area and Shellfish Relay Area Dock and Pier Overlay District are hereby
established and shall be considered as superimposed over any other
districts established by this chapter as amended from time to time.
The Recreational Shellfish Area and Shellfish Relay Area Dock and Pier
Overlay District shall include those areas shown on a maps on file with
the Town Clerk entitled "Recreational Shellfish Area and Shellfish Relay
Area Overlay District," dated June 17, 2010, and "Amendment to the
Barnstable Zoning Map - Sheet 1 of 7, Cotuit Zoning Map Sheet 7 of 7,
Hyannis Zoning Map Sheet 3 of 7, Centerville Zoning Map Sheet 4 of 7,
Osterville Zoning Map Sheet 5 of 7," all dated June 17, 2010, up to and
including the area seaward of the mean high water line, which map,
together with all explanatory material thereon, is hereby incorporated
in and made part of this chapter.
B.
Prohibition. Within the Recreational Shellfish Area and Shellfish Relay
Area Dock and Pier Overlay District, the construction and/or
installation of docks and piers is prohibited, unless such dock or pier
has the benefit of a valid order of conditions issued prior to August 17,
2007, and receives all other necessary local, state and federal permits,
in which case the construction and/or installation and maintenance of
said dock or pier shall not be prohibited.
C.
Reestablishment of damaged or destroyed nonconforming docks or
piers. The reestablishment of a lawful preexisting nonconforming dock
or pier which has been destroyed or damaged by fire, acts of nature
or other catastrophe shall be permitted pursuant to § 240-95A(1) and
B, provided that such reestablishment shall include only materials
currently allowed for such construction by the Barnstable Conservation
Commission, and, for the purposes of this section, the "pursuit of
construction continuously to completion" shall mean that construction
shall be completed within one year of receipt of all required permits.
The redeployment of a lawful preexisting nonconforming seasonal dock
or pier is permitted.
D.
Expansion of existing docks or pier. For the purposes of Article VIII,
Nonconformities, the expansion of an existing dock or pier located
within the Recreational Shellfish Area and Shellfish Relay Area Overlay
District shall be deemed to be substantially detrimental and shall be
prohibited.
E.
Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated, [(from Ch. 703, Private Docks and Piers, § 703-2,
Definitions.]
DOCK and PIER — The terms "dock" and "pier" shall be used
interchangeably for the purposes of these regulations and shall mean
the entire structure of any pier, wharf walkway, or float, and any part
thereof, including pilings, ramps, walkways, float, tie-off pilings,
dolphins and/or outhaul posts, that is located on a coastal bank (310
CMR 10.30), land under water bodies and waterways (310 CMR 10.56),
F.
§ 240-37.1 WASTEWATER DISCHARGE § 240-37.1
232:459
§ 240-38. Medical Services Overlay District. [Added 8-16-2001]
land under the ocean (310 CMR 10.25), land under a salt pond (310
CMR 10.33), rocky intertidal shore (310 CMR 10.31), or that portion
of a coastal beach (310 CMR 10.27) seaward of the mean high water
line. Notwithstanding the above, either a swimming float or work float,
kept at a mooring, that receives a permit from the Harbormaster and is
not connected with the shore, is not a float subject to these regulations.
Bulkheads duly permitted for the purpose of erosion control are not
subject to this section.
SEASONAL — The dock, ramp, floats and all supporting materials are
not in place prior to April 1 of each year and are removed prior to
November 1 of each year.
Enforcement. Any violation of the provisions of the Recreational
Shellfish Area and Shellfish Relay Area Dock and Pier Overlay District
shall be subject to penalty and fines pursuant to § 240-123 of the Town
of Barnstable Code.
G.
Purpose.
The purpose of this section is to permit the development and
relocation of medical and healthcare services on a previously
developed site with convenient regional access. The Medical
Services Overlay District is established as a special district which
overlays the Industrial Zoning District and, in part, the
Groundwater Protection Overlay District. The boundaries of the
Medical Services Overlay District are shown on a map of land
entitled "Medical Services Overlay District" filed with the Town
Clerk, which map, together with all explanatory matter therein, is
hereby incorporated in and made a part of this chapter.
(1)
Provisions of this section are designed to insure that all
development activities associated with the Medical Services
Overlay District will be carried out so as to provide for and
maintain protection of neighboring properties, convenient and safe
access for vehicular and pedestrian movement, fire-fighting and
emergency rescue vehicles, satisfactory methods of stormwater
management, groundwater recharge and handling and disposal
of sewage and waste and adequate off-street parking. Nothing
contained herein shall serve to invalidate or affect the provisions of
any existing zoning ordinances which affect the proposed Medical
Services Overlay District, including without limitations, the
provisions of §§ 240-33 and 240-35 of this chapter.
(2)
A.
Principal permitted uses. The principal permitted uses allowed in the
Medical Services Overlay District shall include ambulatory medical
services, medical offices, dental offices and clinics including patient
treatment facilities of an ambulatory nature, research and development
B.
§ 240-37.1 BARNSTABLE CODE § 240-38
232:460
§ 240-39. Shopping Center Redevelopment Overlay District. [Added
4-24-1996]
activities associated with medical and healthcare issues and/or
healthcare research, treatment or administration.
C. Accessory use. (Reserved for future use.)
D. Conditional use. (Reserved for future use.)
E. Special permit use. (Reserved for future use.)
Bulk regulations (dimensional requirements).
(1) Minimum lot area: 90,000 square feet.
(2) Minimum lot frontage: 200 feet.
(3) Minimum setback, front: 60 feet (except 100 feet from Hadaway).
(4) Side/rear yard: 30 feet maximum.
(5) Building height: 30 feet or 2 1/2 stories, whichever is less.
(6) Front yard landscape buffer: 45 feet.
(7) Landscape buffer, rear and side yard: 30 feet.
(8) Maximum lot coverage: 25%.
(9) Maximum floor area ratio: 0.40.
F.
Purposes.
The purpose of this § 240-39 is to permit the renovation and
redevelopment of a large-scale integrated retail shopping center on
a large site with convenient highway access. The Shopping Center
Redevelopment Overlay District is established as a special district
which overlays another nonresidential zoning district or districts
(including a Groundwater Protection Overlay District).
(1)
The Shopping Center Redevelopment Overlay District permits the
redevelopment and expansion of a shopping center subject to the
specific regulations and requirements contained in this § 240-39,
which regulations and requirements shall govern even where they
are inconsistent with or less restrictive than the other
requirements of this chapter. The regulations of this § 240-39
relating to use, building and lot dimensions, development intensity,
parking, signage and advisory site plan review shall apply only to a
regional shopping center, and not to any other use that is allowed
or permitted in the underlying zoning district.
(2)
The provisions of this § 240-39 are designed to assure that all
development activities associated with a regional shopping center
will be carried out so as to provide for and maintain:
(3)
A.
§ 240-38 WASTEWATER DISCHARGE § 240-39
232:461
Protection of neighboring properties against harmful effects of
uses on the development site;
(a)
Convenient and safe access for fire-fighting and emergency
rescue vehicles within the development site and in relation to
adjacent streets;
(b)
Convenience and safety of vehicular and pedestrian movement
within the development site and in relation to adjacent streets,
properties or improvements;
(c)
Satisfactory methods of stormwater management and
groundwater recharge shall be provided with due regard to the
protection of the Town's groundwater resources;
(d)
Satisfactory methods for storage, handling and disposal of
sewage, refuse and other wastes resulting from the normal
operations of the establishments on the development site;
(e)
Convenience and safety of off-street loading and unloading of
vehicles, goods, products, materials and equipment incidental
to the normal operation of the establishments on the
development site;
(f)
Adequate off-street parking and traffic mitigation measures
that will enhance the efficiency of the transportation system
taking into consideration the overall Town traffic needs
identified in the Barnstable/Yarmouth Transportation Study
prepared by the Town in conjunction with the Town Local
Comprehensive Plan;
(g)
Harmonious relationship to the terrain and to existing
buildings in the vicinity of the development site; and
(h)
Attractive and functional design with due regard to the existing
conditions of the development site and the use thereof for a
regional shopping center, in order to promote the interests of
the community.
(i)
Location. The boundary of the Shopping Center Redevelopment Overlay
District is shown on a map of land entitled "Shopping Center
Redevelopment Overlay Zoning District" filed with the Town Clerk,
which map, together with all explanatory matter thereon, is hereby
incorporated in and made a part of this chapter.
B.
Relationship to underlying districts and regulations.
The Shopping Center Redevelopment Overlay District shall overlay
all underlying districts so that any parcel of land lying in a
Shopping Center Redevelopment Overlay District shall also lie in
the zoning district or districts in which it is otherwise classified by
this chapter.
(1)
C.
§ 240-39 BARNSTABLE CODE § 240-39
232:462
All regulations of the underlying zoning district(s) shall apply
within the Shopping Center Redevelopment Overlay District to the
extent that they are not inconsistent with the specific provisions
of this § 240-39. To the extent the provisions of this § 240-39 are
in conflict with or are inconsistent with other provisions of this
chapter, the provisions of this § 240-39 shall govern and prevail
even if such other provisions are more restrictive than those set
forth in this § 240-39.
(2)
Definitions. The following definitions shall be applicable to land and its
use within the Shopping Center Redevelopment Overlay District:
ADVISORY SITE PLAN REVIEW — The process set forth in § 240-39L of
this chapter, and shall not constitute a development permit within the
meaning of the Cape Cod Commission Act (Chapter 716 of the Acts of
1989) or the Regional Policy Plan promulgated pursuant thereto.
AMUSEMENT USES — The principal use of stores or common areas
in a regional shopping center for the operation of a coin-operated
video arcade, game room, indoor playground, bowling alley or similar
use (but restaurant and theater uses and amusement uses that are
accessory to retail uses shall not constitute amusement uses).
GROSS FLOOR AREA -- — The meaning set forth in § 240-128 of this
chapter.
GROSS LEASABLE AREA -- — Gross floor area, exclusive of mall areas,
stairs, escalators, elevators, utility, storage and equipment rooms, mall
offices, exit and service corridors, toilet rooms, maintenance areas, and
mezzanine areas not used for the public sale or display of goods.
INITIAL REDEVELOPMENT — The expansion of existing improvements
within the Shopping Center Redevelopment Overlay District which
increases the gross floor area of all buildings within the district above
that which is in existence on January 1, 1996, by 50,000 square feet of
gross floor area or more in the aggregate pursuant to a special permit
issued under § 240-39M hereof.62
MEZZANINE(S) — An intermediate level or levels between the floor
and ceiling of any story with an aggregate floor area of not more than
10% of the gross floor area of the store or area of the building in which
the level or levels are located. Mezzanines which are not used for the
public sale or display of goods shall not be treated as an additional story
for purposes of calculating maximum building height. Mezzanine space
may be used for storage and for backroom office functions incident to
the operation of gross floor area within the regional shopping center,
but shall not be rented for such purposes to persons not operating gross
floor area within the regional shopping center. Mezzanines which are
used for the public sale or display of goods shall be treated as gross
leasable area.
D.
62.Editor's Note: The former definition of "major store," which immediately followed this
definition, was repealed 1-17-2019 by Order No. 2019-064.
§ 240-39 WASTEWATER DISCHARGE § 240-39
232:463
REDEVELOPMENT AREA — Land within the boundaries of the
Shopping Center Redevelopment Overlay District, which is used or
proposed for use as part of a regional shopping center, and
encompassing one or more individual lots on which the regional
shopping center will be situated.
REGIONAL SHOPPING CENTER — A concentration of stores and
establishments devoted to retail shopping center uses and amusement
uses including an enclosed structure (which may consist of several
buildings) containing a total of not less than 500,000 square feet of
gross floor area and located on a redevelopment area, together with
ancillary utility facilities, parking areas and driveways, landscaped
areas, and stormwater detention facilities. A regional shopping center
may consist of one or more lots and one or more buildings under
separate ownership, provided that:
RETAIL SHOPPING CENTER USES — A concentration of retail stores
and service establishments, including restaurants, movie theaters and
such other uses as are customarily found in a regional shopping center,
together with ancillary utility facilities, parking areas and driveways,
landscaped areas, and stormwater detention facilities. Regional
shopping center uses may include one area devoted to outdoor, tenttype
sales of home and garden goods, provided that any such area is
operated incident to a retail store having not less than 40,000 square
feet of gross floor area and occupies not more than 5,000 square feet of
area.
The lots and buildings are subject to an operating agreement or
leasehold arrangements, provided that the areas used in common,
including the central enclosed mall area, the parking structures
and the exterior parking and circulation areas, will be under
integrated management; and
(1)
The separate lots and buildings are developed with a unified
approach to architectural and landscape design, pedestrian ingress
and egress, parking, truck loading, vehicular entrances and exits,
drainage, groundwater recharge and utilities.
(2)
Application of requirements.
A redevelopment area may consist of more than a single building
lot, and in such event the requirements of this chapter shall not be
applied to individual building lots, but shall be applied to the entire
redevelopment area as if the redevelopment area were a single
building lot notwithstanding the fact that the building lots within
the redevelopment area may be in different ownership.
(1)
The regional shopping center and other improvements within the
redevelopment area may be developed in phases and may be
developed and occupied under one or more building permits and
occupancy permits.
(2)
E.
§ 240-39 BARNSTABLE CODE § 240-39
232:464
The provisions of this § 240-39 shall not apply to any expansion of
existing improvements within the Shopping Center Redevelopment
Overlay District until the exercise of rights under a special permit
issued under § 240-39M with respect to the initial redevelopment,
and any such expansion which does not constitute the initial
redevelopment shall be subject to all of the requirements of the
underlying zoning district(s) including, without limitation, the
requirement of a special permit for certain uses and structures
within the district. Following the exercise of rights under a special
permit issued under § 240-39M with respect to the initial
redevelopment, this § 240-39 shall apply to all improvements
thereafter constructed within the Shopping Center Redevelopment
Overlay District.
(3)
Permitted and prohibited uses.
No more than 25% of the gross leasable area within the regional
shopping center shall be devoted to uses other than retail shopping
center uses, and not more than 75,000 square feet of gross leasable
area in a regional shopping center shall be devoted to amusement
uses unless a special permit is issued therefor by the Zoning Board
of Appeals.
(1)
The following uses are prohibited in the Shopping Center
Redevelopment Overlay District:
All uses prohibited in § 240-35F(2) [GP Groundwater
Protection Overlay District] of this chapter.
(a)
Parking and/or storage of transport vehicles for fuel, including
but not limited to oil, coal and gas.
(b)
Parking and/or storage of transport vehicles for toxic and/or
hazardous substances.
(c)
(d) Hotel/motel.
(e) Multifamily dwellings.
Drive-through restaurant or drive-through bank, except that
a drive-through bank shall be permitted in so much of the
Shopping Center Redevelopment Overlay District as lies within
the underlying Highway Business District, subject to the
special permit provisions of § 240-39M and a drive-through
restaurant may be permitted only on that area within the
SCROD identified as "Drive-Through Restaurant Sub Zone" as
shown on the map entitled "Shopping Center Redevelopment
Overlay District Amendment,"63 dated February 20, 2015,
subject to the special permit provisions of § 240-39M.
(f)
(2)
F.
63.Editor's Note: The map is on file in the office of the Town Clerk.
§ 240-39 WASTEWATER DISCHARGE § 240-39
232:465
[Amended 9-18-2008 by Order No. 2009-08; 5-7-2015 by
Order No. 2015-071]
Gasoline and oil filling stations (other than a tire, battery and
auto accessories store which is operated incident to a retail
store having not less than 40,000 square feet of gross floor
area in the regional shopping center and which does not
provide for the changing of oil or lubrication of motor vehicles).
(g)
Casinos and other gambling establishments (other than the
incidental sale of lottery tickets as part of a use otherwise
permitted in the Shopping Center Overlay District).
(h)
Bulk and dimensional regulations.
Land located within the Shopping Center Redevelopment Overlay
District and used for a regional shopping center shall be subject to
the dimensional controls set forth below:
(a) Minimum area of redevelopment area: 50 acres.
(b) Minimum lot size (individual building lots): none.
(c) Minimum lot frontage (individual building lots): 20 feet.
Minimum side, front and rear yards (other than at the
perimeter of the redevelopment area): none.
(d)
Minimum front yard setback (at perimeter of the
redevelopment area): 30 feet. [Amended 9-18-2008 by
Order No. 2009-08]
One hundred feet along Iyannough Road/Route 132 Road
except 50 feet along that portion of Route 132/Iyannough
Road on that area within the SCROD identified as "Drive-
Through Restaurant Sub Zone."
[1]
One hundred feet along the easterly side of the roadway
which would be created if Independence Drive were
extended from its existing terminus on the northerly side
of Route 132 along its current trajectory across Route 132
and the redevelopment area.
[2]
Within 100 feet of Route 28/Falmouth Road, the minimum
setback shall be 20 feet, but there shall be a maximum
setback of 50 feet.
[3]
(e)
Minimum side and rear yards (at perimeter of redevelopment
area): 30 feet.
(f)
Maximum lot coverage as percentage of lot area of
redevelopment area: 50%.
(g)
(1)
G.
§ 240-39 BARNSTABLE CODE § 240-39
232:466
Maximum building height: 42.5 feet or two stories, whichever
is lesser.
(h)
Except as specifically stated to the contrary in Subsection G(1),
the bulk and dimensional requirements set forth therein shall be
applied to a redevelopment lot as if it were one lot, even though
it may be comprised of several lots in different ownerships. More
than one building may be located on a single lot within the
Shopping Center Redevelopment Overlay District.
(2)
Skylights, mechanical penthouses and architectural features not
designed for human occupancy (collectively, the "special features")
shall be excluded in determining the height of any building within
a regional shopping center. However, such special features shall be
subject to the following restrictions and limitations:
Provided the same are approved in the special permit issued
pursuant to § 240-39M hereof, architectural features shall be
permitted above each entrance to the regional shopping center
in excess of the maximum building height, provided such
architectural features do not exceed 60 feet in height, and the
length of the architectural features over any single entrance
shall not extend over more than 25% of the entire length of
the building wall above which such architectural features are
located (measured on a building-by-building basis); and
(a)
Rooftop mechanical features (such as heating and airconditioning
units, vents, stacks and mechanical penthouses),
rooftop screening elements and skylight features over the food
court and over the enclosed mall (collectively, the "rooftop
features") shall be permitted to exceed the maximum building
height, provided that they remain within the rooftop feature
height limitation. A rooftop feature shall be considered to
remain within the rooftop feature height limitation if it falls
below a sight line running 10° above the horizontal starting
from a height of 42.5 feet. Rooftop features may exceed the
rooftop feature height limitation only if the special permit
described in § 240-39M so provides. In no case shall a rooftop
feature exceed 60 feet in height. Rooftop mechanical features
(such as heating and air-conditioning units, vents, stacks and
mechanical penthouses) shall in any event be screened by use
of parapet walls or similar elements if necessary. [Amended
1-20-2005 by Order No. 2005-038]
(b)
(3)
Maximum increase in gross leasable area. No regional shopping center
shall result in more than 1,200,000 square feet of gross floor area
within the redevelopment area, measured on an aggregate basis. The
maximum gross floor area of 1,200,000 square feet set forth above shall
be reduced by 20,000 square feet of gross floor area for every acre by
which the total area of the redevelopment area is less than 59 acres.
H.
§ 240-39 WASTEWATER DISCHARGE § 240-39
232:467
For purposes of this § 240-39, the floor area of parking structures shall
not be treated as gross floor area or gross leasable area.
Limitation on impervious surfaces; buffer strip landscaping.
No more than 70% of the total redevelopment area shall be
rendered impervious by the installation of buildings, structures
and paved surfaces, measured on an aggregate basis, unless
groundwater mitigation land is provided at a one-to-one ratio for
any overage of impervious cover in the redevelopment area.
Groundwater mitigation land shall mean land located within the
same or a more restrictive Groundwater Protection District in a
zone of contribution to the well fields operated as of January 1,
1996 by the Barnstable Water Company and/or the Barnstable Fire
District which land is permanently restricted by or on behalf of
the owners of the redevelopment area to be left in an open and
natural state. However, even with the dedication of groundwater
mitigation land, no more than 82.7% of the total redevelopment
area shall be so rendered impervious. Rooftop and surface water
drainage systems shall be designed and maintained in accordance
with the standards set forth in § 240-39L(4)(j). For purposes of
this § 240-39I, roadways (other than interior access drives) built
in accordance with municipal specifications (as the same may be
modified or waived by the Planning Board) and used as public
way(s) or private way(s) shall not be treated as impervious surfaces
and shall not be treated as part of the area of the district for
purpose of such calculation.
(1)
As a part of the portion of the redevelopment area to be maintained
in pervious condition, a landscaped buffer strip of variable width
shall be provided and maintained along the redevelopment area's
frontage on Route 28, Route 132 and any extension of Enterprise
Road which is laid out in conjunction with the redevelopment.
Said landscaped buffer strip shall be a minimum of 15 feet in
depth from the property line and contain at least 2.5% of the total
redevelopment area. The design of this buffer strip may include
sidewalks/bikepaths, berms, indigenous planting materials and
other ground cover. Cross over access drives and signs provided
for herein shall be permitted in the landscaped buffer strip, but
parking areas are prohibited. All other roadway frontages shall
have a landscaped buffer strip of at least 10 feet.
(2)
I.
Parking and loading. A regional shopping center shall be subject to the
following minimum off-street parking and loading requirements:
Required off-street parking for a regional shopping center shall be
provided at a ratio of not less than 4.3 parking spaces for each
1,000 square feet of gross leasable area of all buildings located in
the regional shopping center. The foregoing parking requirement
shall be calculated without regard to the multiple uses that may be
contained in the regional shopping center.
(1)
J.
§ 240-39 BARNSTABLE CODE § 240-39
232:468
All off-street parking spaces required by this § 240-39J shall be
located within the redevelopment area, except that parking spaces
may be located outside of the redevelopment area on another
nonresidentially zoned lot provided (a) such other lot is located
within 300 feet of the redevelopment area on which the use for
which such spaces are required is located, and (b) such lot is
in common ownership with, or subject to a long term lease or
easement for the benefit of, all or a portion of the redevelopment
area. In addition, parking spaces may be located at such other
locations as may be approved by the Zoning Board of Appeals
as part of any Traffic Demand Management Plan which shall be
incorporated as part of the special permit issued under § 240-39M
hereof.
(2)
Each off-street parking space shall have minimum dimensions of
nine by 18 feet, excluding the driveway to such space. Parking
stalls within the Shopping Center Redevelopment Overlay District
which are designed at 90° shall have the following minimum
dimensions:
Ninety-degree parking dimensions:
[1] Stall width: nine feet, zero inches.
[2] Stall length: 18 feet, zero inches.
[3] Aisle width: 24 feet, zero inches.
[4] Bay width: 60 feet, zero inches.
(a)
All parking stalls which are designed at angles other than
90% shall comply with the minimum parking space dimensions
set forth in § 240-104 of this chapter. Landscaping shall be
provided at the rate of one tree of three-inch caliper per eight
spaces, and such trees shall be located within the parking
area. Such parking area landscaping areas shall constitute not
less than 5% of the land area devoted to grade-level parking
fields. Above-grade parking structures shall be designed so as
to provide a visual screen to shield, to the extent practicable,
cars parked on the upper level from the view of pedestrians.
(b)
(3)
Signs in the Shopping Center Redevelopment Overlay District. Only
the following types of signs shall be permitted in the Shopping Center
Redevelopment Overlay District:
Large freestanding exterior signs:
(a) Maximum number: three signs.
(b) Maximum height: not to exceed 22 feet above grade.
Maximum area: not to exceed 170 square feet per side
exclusive of structures holding the sign. Reasonable efforts
(c)
(1)
K.
§ 240-39 WASTEWATER DISCHARGE § 240-39
232:469
shall be exercised to minimize the size of any such supporting
structures. [Amended 1-17-2019 by Order No. 2019-064]
Wall signs identifying retail stores or restaurants having gross
leasable area of greater than 25,000 square feet or having exterior
public entrances; the food court; and the regional shopping center,
provided that no wall sign shall extend higher than the top of the
parapet wall:
Maximum letter height: five feet for signs accessory to anchor
and major stores, and four feet for other such signs. This letter
height restriction shall not apply to emblems, logos, or other
designs associated with the sign display.
(a)
Maximum area:
Anchor stores (for each tenant with a gross leasable area
of 45,000 square feet or more): The maximum sign area
for any one display shall not exceed 200 square feet for
the first sign; the maximum sign area for any additional
display shall be 150 square feet. There shall only be one
sign display per eligible elevation. An additional sign
allowance of 30 square feet shall be provided for entrance
door and awning signs.
[1]
Major stores (for each tenant with a gross leasable area of
12,000 square feet or more): The maximum sign area for
any one display shall not exceed 120 square feet. There
shall only be one sign display per eligible elevation. An
additional sign allowance of 15 square feet shall be
provided for entrance door and awning signs.
[2]
In-line store (for each tenant with an exterior entrance):
The maximum sign area for any one display shall not
exceed 50 square feet for tenants with storefronts less
than 50 linear feet in length. An additional square foot of
sign area shall be allowed for each linear foot of storefront
above 50; the maximum sign area for any one display
shall not exceed 75 square feet. There shall only be one
sign display per tenant. An additional sign allowance of
10 square feet shall be provided for entrance door and
awning signs.
[3]
Mall entrances: The maximum sign area for any one
display shall not exceed 50 square feet. There shall only be
one sign per each eligible mall entrance.
[4]
(b)
(2)
Wall signs designating loading areas, service courts, employee
entrances and similar areas:
(a) Maximum number: no limit.
(3)
§ 240-39 BARNSTABLE CODE § 240-39
232:470
(b) Maximum mounting height above ground: eight feet.
(c) Maximum area: six square feet.
Freestanding directional signs indicating access and egress to the
site, as well as direction to department stores, services or other
areas within the regional shopping center:
Maximum number: three times the total number of vehicular
entrances.
(a)
(b) Maximum height to top of sign above ground: seven feet.
(c) Maximum area: 16 square feet per side.
(4)
Hanging parking structure signs at vehicular entrances to parking
structures:
Maximum number: one per vehicle ramp access point to
parking structures.
(a)
(b) Maximum height: one foot, six inches.
(c) Maximum area: 16 square feet per side.
In addition, directional and parking area identification signs
shall be permitted within the parking structures, and safety/
height limitation markings shall be permitted on the exterior of
the parking structures.
(d)
(5)
Parking lot identification signs.
(a) Maximum number: one per light post.
(b) Maximum size: three square feet per side.
(6)
64Banners which do not advertise particular stores or articles for
sale shall be permitted.
(7)
In addition to the signs otherwise permitted under this § 240-39J,
wall signs for freestanding buildings and movie theaters (meaning
buildings and movie theaters which are not physically connected
to the enclosed mall of the regional shopping center) which are
otherwise permitted in the underlying zoning district under this
chapter shall be permitted in the Shopping Center Redevelopment
Overlay District. In addition, for so long as fewer than two of
the freestanding signs described in Subsection K(11) are installed,
one freestanding exterior sign shall be permitted for freestanding
movie theaters, which sign shall have dimensions which meet the
size requirements of the underlying zoning district.
(8)
64.Editor's Note: Former Subsection K(7), pertaining to electronic reader boards, which
immediately preceded his subsection, was repealed 1-17-2019 by Order No. 2019-064.
This order also provided for the redesignation of former Subsection K(8) through (13) as
Subsection K(7) through (12).
§ 240-39 WASTEWATER DISCHARGE § 240-39
232:471
In addition to the wall signs permitted under § 240-39K(2), one
exterior marquee wall sign for movie theaters located within a
regional shopping center shall be permitted with a size of up to 150
square feet.
(9)
In addition to the signs permitted under § 240-39K(1) hereof, up to
two freestanding exterior signs for movie theaters located within a
regional shopping center shall be permitted as follows:
(a) Maximum number: two.
(b) Maximum height: 14 feet above grade.
Maximum area: not to exceed 175 square feet per side,
exclusive of structures holding the sign.
(c)
(10)
In addition to the signs permitted under § 240-39K(1) hereof, one
freestanding exterior sign shall be permitted on that area within
the SCROD identified as "Drive-Through Restaurant Sub Zone,"
provided that the maximum height of freestanding signs does not
exceed 12 feet above grade and the maximum area of the
freestanding signs does not exceed 50 square feet per side,
exclusive of the structure holding the sign. [Added 5-7-2015 by
Order No. 2015-07165]
(11)
No special permit shall be required for signs that are in
conformance with the standards set forth above.
(12)
Advisory site plan review and provisions.
Findings. Owing to their physical characteristic and the nature
of their operations, a regional shopping center may affect
neighboring properties and adjacent sidewalks and streets. It is in
the interest of the community to promote functional and aesthetic
design, construction and maintenance of a regional shopping
center and to minimize any harmful affects on surrounding areas.
(1)
Purposes. The provisions of this section are designed to assure
that all development activities associated with a regional shopping
center will be carried out in furtherance of the purposes articulated
in § 240-39A, taking into account the existing condition of the
redevelopment area, the large-scale character of developments
such as the regional shopping center, the customary site layout of
regional shopping centers, and the necessity to permit natural light
to illuminate the common areas of the regional shopping center
(hereinafter referred to as the "design constraints").
(2)
Advisory site plan review/when required. The provisions of this
§ 240-39L shall apply to development within the Shopping Center
Redevelopment Overlay District in lieu of the site plan review
(3)
L.
65.Editor's Note: This order also renumbered former Subsection K(12) as Subsection K(13).
§ 240-39 BARNSTABLE CODE § 240-39
232:472
provisions of Article IX of this chapter. At least 60 days prior to
filing any DRI application with the Cape Cod Commission, the
proponent of a regional shopping center shall make an informal
filing with the Building Commissioner, in draft form, of such plans
and materials relating to the DRI application as the proponent
intends to file with the Commission with its DRI application and
such relevant plans and materials relating to the MEPA process
as are then available. Within 30 days following such informal
submission, the Building Commissioner and other members of the
Site Plan Review Committee established under Article IX of this
chapter and such other Town staff as may be designated by the
Building Commissioner shall review, comment upon and make
recommendations with respect to the plans and materials so
submitted, provided that the Building Commissioner shall have the
right to extend such thirty-day period by an additional 30 days
at the request of the Site Plan Review Committee. In conducting
its review the Site Plan Review Committee shall consider the
consistency of such plans and materials with the site development
standards set forth in Subsection L(4) hereof. The informal filing
and review described in this Subsection L(3) requires no approval
and therefore does not constitute a development permit within the
meaning of the Cape Cod Commission Act (Chapter 716 of the
Acts of 1989) or the Regional Policy Plan promulgated pursuant
thereto; however, the Cape Cod Commission shall be invited to
have representatives participate in the advisory site plan review
process.
Site development standards.
A reasonable effort shall be made to improve, conserve and
protect natural features that are of some lasting benefit to the
site, its environs and the community at large.
(a)
Slopes which exceed 10% shall be protected by appropriate
measures against erosion, runoff, and unstable soil, trees and
rocks. Measures shall be taken to stabilize the land surface
from unnecessary disruption. Such stabilization measures shall
be the responsibility of the property owner.
(b)
The placement of buildings, structures, fences, lighting and
fixtures on each site shall not interfere with traffic circulation,
safety, appropriate use and enjoyment of adjacent properties.
(c)
At any driveway, a visibility triangle shall be provided in which
nothing shall be erected, placed, planted or allowed to grow
so as to materially impede vision from within motor vehicles
between a height of three feet and eight feet above the average
center-line grades of the intersecting street and driveway, said
triangle being bounded by the intersection of the street line
and the edges of a driveway an a line joining points along said
lines 20 feet distant from their projected intersection.
(d)
(4)
§ 240-39 WASTEWATER DISCHARGE § 240-39
232:473
Adequate illumination shall be provided to parking lots and
other areas for vehicular and pedestrian circulation. All
illumination shall be directed and/or shielded so as not to
interfere with traffic beyond the perimeter of the site.
(e)
All areas designed for vehicular use shall be paved with a
minimum of either a 2 1/2 inches bituminous asphalt concrete,
a six-inch portland cement concrete pavement, or other
surface, such as brick or cobblestone, as approved by the Town
Engineer.
(f)
All parking spaces shall be arranged and clearly marked in
accordance with the parking lot design standards contained in
§ 240-39J herein. Signs and pavement markings shall be used
as appropriate to control approved traffic patterns.
(g)
The provisions of § 240-52 of this chapter shall not apply to
land within the Shopping Center Redevelopment Overlay
District. Instead, exterior landscaping of a regional shopping
center shall be subject to review in connection with the
advisory site plan review process described herein.
(h)
All utility service transmission systems, including but not
limited to water, sewer, natural gas, electrical and telephone
lines, shall, whenever practicable, be placed underground.
Electric, telephone, cable TV, and other such utilities shall
be underground, except for transformers, electric switching
boxes or similar equipment and gas meters, which may be
above ground.
(i)
All surface water runoff from structures and impervious
surfaces shall be disposed of on site, but in no case shall
surface water drainage be across sidewalks or public or private
ways. In no case shall surface water runoff be drained directly
into wetlands or water bodies (except for drainage structures
in place as of the effective date of this § 240-39). All drainage
systems shall be designed to minimize the discharge of
pollutants by maximizing appropriately designed vegetated
drainage channels and sedimentation basins that allow for
adequate settling of suspended solids and maximum
infiltration (with due regard to the design constraints). Dry
wells, leaching pits and other similar drainage structures may
be used only where other methods are not practicable. Subject
to ambient surcharge conditions, roof runoff shall be
recharged to the ground via a system of dry wells and/or
infiltration systems. Nontoxic roof materials shall be used to
minimize the leaching of toxic materials to the groundwater.
To minimize water utilization, all new plumbing fixtures shall
be designed to meet water conservation measures as required
under the State Building and Plumbing Codes. All such
drainage structures shall be preceded by oil, grease and
(j)
§ 240-39 BARNSTABLE CODE § 240-39
232:474
sediment traps to facilitate removal of contaminants. All
calculations shall be for a twenty-fiver-year storm and shall be
reviewed by the Town Engineer. The materials submitted shall
include provision for an appropriate maintenance program for
such drainage structures to be implemented and maintained by
the proponent. The materials submitted shall show adequate
measures to mitigate pollution of surface or groundwater to
minimize erosion and sedimentation. All drainage shall be
designed so that all runoff shall be disposed of on site,
groundwater recharge is maximized, and neighboring
properties will not be adversely affected.
The materials submitted shall describe estimated average daily
and peak hour vehicle trips to be generated by the site and
traffic flow showing adequate access to and from the site
and adequate circulation within the site taking into account
the Barnstable/Yarmouth Transportation Study. The proponent
of a regional shopping center will include in such materials
reasonable measures to lower traffic demand to the regional
shopping center such as, by way of example only, working
with other major retailers along the 132 corridor to promote
bus and shuttle bus activity, encouraging carpooling among
employees, and/or similar measures, which materials shall be
referred to as the "Traffic Demand Management Plan."
Reasonable efforts shall be made to provide vehicular and
pedestrian connections within the redevelopment area to
adjoining properties devoted to retail use.
(k)
Special permit provisions.
Special permit for regional shopping center.
No building permit or occupancy permit shall be issued for
any expansion of a regional shopping center which increases
the gross floor area of the regional shopping center above that
existing on the effective date of this § 240-39 by more than
50,000 square feet of gross floor area unless the Zoning Board
of Appeals has issued a special permit approving such use in
accordance with the provisions of this § 240-39M. In addition,
no building permit or occupancy permit shall be issued for
a drive-through bank or drive-through restaurant unless the
Zoning Board of Appeals has issued a special permit or a
modification of a special permit issued under this section,
approving such use, subject to the provisions of this
§ 240-39M. [Amended 9-18-2008 by Order No. 2009-08;
5-7-2015 by Order No. 2015-071]
(a)
A special permit for a regional shopping center may provide for
phased development (and, if applicable, a projected phasing
plan shall be provided to the Board of Appeals as part of the
special permit process under § 240-39M). A special permit for
(b)
(1)
M.
§ 240-39 WASTEWATER DISCHARGE § 240-39
232:475
a regional shopping center shall become void two years from
the date of issue unless any construction work contemplated
thereby (or first phase thereof, if applicable) shall commence
and proceed in good faith continuously to completion, or, if no
construction work is contemplated by the special permit, the
use authorized thereby is commenced.
Any work done in deviation from a special permit granted
pursuant to this § 240-39M shall be a violation of this chapter,
unless such deviation is approved in writing by the Zoning
Board of Appeals. However, a special permit may be granted
based upon plans showing one or more permissible building
areas and/or permissible parking structure areas, in which
buildings and other structures are to be located, rather than
with the locations of the buildings and other structures finally
established. Provided the boundaries of such permissible
building areas and/or permissible parking structure areas are
approved by the Zoning Board of Appeals in connection with
the special permit, once the special permit is granted, no
separate approval of the Zoning Board of Appeals will be
required for the actual location of the buildings or
improvements within such permissible building areas and/or
permissible parking structure areas [provided that no material
change to the design or materials described in § 240-39M(2)(a)
shall be made without the approval of the Zoning Board of
Appeals.] The Zoning Board of Appeals may amend or modify
a special permit upon the application of the developer of a
regional shopping center and, if the Zoning Board of Appeals
determines that such amendment or modification is minor in
nature, such amendment or modification may be approved
without a hearing upon the submission of plans and
information that may, in the discretion of the Zoning Board
of Appeals, be less extensive than the plans and information
required in this § 240-39M. Amendments or modifications
determined by the Zoning Board of Appeals not to be minor in
nature shall require a public hearing.
(c)
The purpose of the special permit for a regional shopping
center is to assure that the development of a regional shopping
center is carried out in a manner which is (1) consistent with
the purposes set forth in § 240-39A hereof and the site
development standards set forth in § 240-39L(4) hereof, (2)
consistent with the terms and conditions of any DRI permit
issued by the Cape Cod Commission and the certificate of the
Secretary of Environmental Affairs on the final environmental
impact report, (3) with due regard given to the Design
Guidelines for Cape Cod prepared by the Cape Cod
Commission in light of the design constraints, and (4)
consistent with such additional reasonable conditions as may
be imposed by the Zoning Board of Appeals as are not
(d)
§ 240-39 BARNSTABLE CODE § 240-39
232:476
inconsistent with the foregoing. The Zoning Board of Appeals
shall grant a special permit for a regional shopping center
upon its determination that the standards for the issuance
of such special permit set forth in this Subsection M(1)(d)
have been complied with, giving due regard to the design
constraints.
Required contents of special permit application. The application for
a special permit under this § 240-39M shall include:
Building elevation plans for all exterior facades of buildings
and structures, at a scale of 1/16 inch equals one foot, or
such scale as may be required by the Zoning Board of Appeals
for detail drawings, indicating surface materials and colors,
together with not less than three representative cross sections.
(a)
A tabulation of the areas of the proposed site elements,
including buildings (footprints and gross leasable area and
gross floor area), parking structures and surface parking areas
(square footage and number of parking spaces), stormwater
management facilities, and landscaped areas (square footage,
number of trees and other plantings).
(b)
Updated versions of the materials submitted to the Building
Commissioner in connection with the advisory site plan review
process described in § 240-39L above.
(c)
Any request for gross leasable area in excess of the use
limitations set forth in § 240-39F(1).
(d)
Any request to permit rooftop features to exceed the rooftop
feature height limitation set forth in § 240-39G(3)(b).
(e)
All materials relating to any request to permit off-site parking
under § 240-39J(2).
(f)
A description of the operating agreement and/or leasehold
agreements contemplated in the definition of "regional
shopping center."
(g)
Additional information as may be required by the Zoning Board
of Appeals as reasonably necessary to making the
determinations required by this section.
(h)
(2)
Required procedures for special permit.
At least six copies are required of all plans, drawings and
written information. Submissions shall be delivered to the
Zoning Board of Appeals.
(a)
The Zoning Board of Appeals may solicit the advice of any
other Town agency or department it deems necessary to
properly make the determinations required by this section.
(b)
(3)
§ 240-39 WASTEWATER DISCHARGE § 240-39
232:477
§ 240-40. Adult Use Overlay District. [Added 6-4-1998]
In issuing a special permit under this § 240-39M, the Zoning
Board of Appeals shall give due regard to, and shall not be
inconsistent with the decisions and recommendations of the
Cape Cod Commission as set forth in any DRI permit or similar
approval.
(c)
The Zoning Board of Appeals shall also include as a condition
of its special permit the performance of any written
commitments made by the developer of a regional shopping
center to the Zoning Board of Appeals, the Planning Board
or the Town Council intended to reduce or limit the impacts,
financial or otherwise, of the regional shopping center on the
Town. Such conditions shall be based on the written
information furnished to the Zoning Board of Appeals by the
Planning Board and Town Council. Such conditions shall be
binding on the applicant for such special permit provided they
are consistent with the provisions of Section 15 of Chapter 716
of the Acts of 1989 (the Cape Cod Commission Act).
(d)
The Zoning Board of Appeals may include as a condition of
its special permit that, prior to the issuance of a certificate
of occupancy for the regional shopping center, the Building
Commissioner shall be provided with evidence that the
operating agreement and/or leasehold arrangements
contemplated in the definition of "regional shopping center"
are in place.
(e)
If the proposed improvements which are the subject of an
application for a special permit under this § 240-39M have
not been subject to the review of the Cape Cod Commission
because at the time of such application the Cape Cod
Commission or the DRI process has been abolished, then the
proposed improvements shall be subject to site plan review
under Article IX of this chapter.
(f)
District established. An Adult Use Overlay District is hereby
established, and shall be considered as superimposed over any other
districts established by this chapter, and is shown as an overlay on
the Official Zoning Map established pursuant to § 240-6, Zoning Map,
herein.
A.
Adult use. Within the Adult Use Overlay District, and only within the
Adult Use Overlay District, an adult use may be permitted, provided
that a special permit is first obtained from the Zoning Board of Appeals,
subject to the following conditions of approval:
The special permit shall be issued to the owner of the adult use and
shall not transfer with a change in ownership of the business and/
or property.
(1)
B.
§ 240-39 BARNSTABLE CODE § 240-40
232:478
The special permit shall lapse after two years, unless a shorter
term is specified by the Zoning Board of Appeals. Upon receipt of
a valid application, the Zoning Board of Appeals may grant another
special permit, provided that the Board finds that all conditions of
this § 240-40 herein have been complied with, and all conditions of
approval of the Zoning Board of Appeals.
(2)
The special permit shall not be renewed if any of the following has
taken place on or in proximity to and associated with the premises,
as provided for in Subsection B(2) above:
(a) Unlawful sexual activity.
(b) Gambling.
(c) Drug use.
(d) Violent crimes.
(e) Offenses against children.
Repeated public disturbances requiring intervention by the
police.
(f)
(g) Any other illegal activities.
(3)
Violation of any of the conditions of approval of the special permit
shall be grounds for nonrenewal of the special permit as provided
for in Subsection B(2) above.
(4)
No special permit shall be issued to an owner convicted of violating
MGL Ch. 119, § 63, (Inducing or abetting delinquency of a child) or
MGL Ch. 272 § 28, (Matter harmful to minors, etc.), or similar laws
in other states.
(5)
Where necessary to protect adjacent uses, the Zoning Board of
Appeals may require buffering by fencing, vegetation or other
screening methods.
(6)
No adult use shall be allowed within a building containing
residential use, or upon a lot with residential use. No adult use
shall be located within 500 feet of a residence.
(7)
Where the adult use is not governed by the Licensing Board, the
following conditions shall apply:
A manager responsible for the operation of the establishment
shall be designated by the owner, if the owner is not the
manager. The manager shall register with the Building
Commissioner. No manager shall be designated who has been
convicted of violating MGL Ch. 119, § 63, (Inducing or abetting
delinquency of a child) or MGL Ch. 272, § 28, (Matter harmful
to minors, etc.) or similar laws in other states
(a)
(8)
§ 240-40 WASTEWATER DISCHARGE § 240-40
232:479
§ 240-40.1. Former Grade 5 School Planned Unit Development
Overlay District. [Added 9-2-2004 by Order No. 2004-128]
The owner and/or manager of the establishment shall be
responsible for knowing what is taking place with respect to
the patrons in all parts of the establishment at any given time.
(b)
The Zoning Board of Appeals may establish the hours of
operation.
(c)
There shall be screening of windows and doors to prevent the
public's view of the interior from any public or private right-ofway.
(d)
The interior of an adult bookstore, adult video store, or adult
paraphernalia store shall be well lit; and there shall be no
closed booths.
(e)
The interior of an adult use nonlive entertainment establishment
shall provide the following:
An anteroom or other content-neutral space which will identify
the adult use through the use of content-neutral signage.
(a)
All adult materials will be segregated from nonadult use
nonlive entertainment materials.
(b)
Written cautions will be made denying access to minors to the
adult sections of the establishment.
(c)
The purchase point of adult use nonlive entertainment
materials shall be segregated from the purchase point of
nonadult use nonlive entertainment materials.
(d)
Adult use nonlive entertainment purchases or rentals shall be
bagged with an opaque material.
(e)
(9)
Preexisting adult uses. Any adult use that was in existence as of the
first date of publication of the notice of public hearing on the zoning
amendment inserting this section regulating adult uses may continue
to operate in the same location, without material change in scale or
content of the business, provided that the owner complies with the
provisions of this section requiring a special permit, including all
relevant conditions imposed thereon.
C.
Prohibited uses. Nothing in this chapter is intended to authorize,
legalize or permit the establishment, operation or maintenance of any
business, building or use which violated any Town ordinance or statute
of the commonwealth of Massachusetts regarding public nuisances,
sexual conduct, lewdness, or obscene or harmful matter, or the
exhibition or public display thereof.
D.
A. Purpose.
§ 240-40 BARNSTABLE CODE § 240-40.1
232:480
The purpose of the Former Grade 5 School Planned Unit
Development District is to encourage flexibility in the design and
development of land within the district in order to promote its
most appropriate use; to facilitate the adequate and economical
provision of streets, utilities and public spaces; and to preserve the
natural and scenic qualities of open areas.
(1)
This development district is intended to permit diversification in
the location of structures and uses and improve circulation
facilities and other site qualities while ensuring adequate
standards relating to public health, safety and welfare and
convenience both in the use and occupancy of buildings and
facilities.
(2)
Procedure. The owner or owners or lessees of tracts of land consisting
of five acres or more in the Former Grade 5 School Planned Unit
Development Overlay District may submit to the Planning Board a
request for a Special Permit to allow for a plan of development and use
of such tracts meeting the requirements set forth below:
The Planning Board shall be the special permit granting authority
and shall follow the procedures for issuing special permits as
provided for in § 240-125C herein, specifically substituting the
words "Planning Board" for the words "Zoning Board of Appeals."
(1)
Lot area and lot frontage requirements may be reduced, provided
the overall density is not reduced, and yard requirements need only
be applied in relationship to the tract boundaries.
(2)
Bulk regulations shall be as follows:
Minimum Yard
Setbacks
(feet)
Zoning
Districts
Minimum
Lot
Area
(square
feet)
Minimum
Lot
Frontage
(feet)
Minimum
Lot
Width
(feet) Front Side Rear
Maximum
Building
Height
(feet)
Maximum
Lot
Coverage
as % of Lot
Area
FG-5
PUD
43,560 20 -- 50 50 50 38 501
Notes:
1 Less any required setback.
(3)
More than one building is permitted on tracts held by one owner or
in common ownership.
(4)
B.
§ 240-40.1 WASTEWATER DISCHARGE § 240-40.1
232:481
A site plan in accordance with the Town of Barnstable site plan
review regulations66 indicating the planned location of buildings
and their use, off-street parking areas, driveways, easements,
walks, the location, type and height of walls, and the extent of
landscaping or other treatment for the protection of adjacent
properties is required.
(5)
A copy of any deed restrictions intended to be recorded shall be
submitted.
(6)
Permitted uses with issuance of special permit for planned unit
development. The permitted uses shall include: residential uses such
as garden apartments, townhouses, multifamily housing; office uses
such as medical and professional offices; assisted-living developments;
museum uses; recreational uses; open space uses; private educational
uses; higher educational uses; and mixed-use developments
incorporating any of the above, including food service as an accessory
use to the principal uses listed above.
C.
Standards for reviewing and approving planned unit developments.
Before any action on any of the plans for a planned unit development, a
site plan and any supplemental plans shall be submitted to the Planning
Board for study and review. The Planning Board shall report its
recommendations for approval or disapproval, together with the
reasons therefor and any additional requirements, within 20 days of
receipt of a site plan. Reasonable requirements may be recommended
by the Planning Board for the protection of adjoining residential
property. The Planning Board shall approve the planned unit
development only if it finds that the planned unit development satisfies
all of the following standards:
General standards.
The planned unit development shall be consistent with the
Town of Barnstable Comprehensive Plan.
(a)
The planned unit development shall provide for an effective
and unified treatment of the development possibilities on the
project site making appropriate provision for the preservation
of scenic features and amenities of the site and the
surrounding areas.
(b)
The planned unit development shall be planned and developed
to harmonize with any existing or proposed development in the
area surrounding the site.
(c)
(1)
(2) Design standards.
D.
66.Editor's Note: See Art. IX, Site Plan Review.
§ 240-40.1 BARNSTABLE CODE § 240-40.1
232:482
All buildings in the layout and design shall be an integral part
of the development and have convenient access to and from
adjacent uses.
(a)
Individual buildings shall be related to each other in design,
masses, materials, placement and connections to provide a
visually and physically integrated development.
(b)
Treatment of the sides and rear of all buildings within the
planned unit development shall be comparable in amenity and
appearance to the treatment given to street frontages of these
same buildings.
(c)
The design of buildings and the parking facilities shall take
advantage of the topography of the project site where
appropriate, to provide separate levels of access.
(d)
All buildings shall be arranged as to avoid undue exposure to
concentrated loading or parking facilities wherever possible
and shall be so oriented as to preserve visual and audible
privacy between adjacent buildings.
(e)
All buildings shall be arranged as to be accessible to
emergency vehicles.
(f)
Landscape design standards.
Landscape treatment for plazas, roads, paths, service and
parking areas shall be designed as an integral part of a
coordinated landscape design.
(a)
Primary landscape treatment shall consist of shrubs, ground
cover, and street trees, and shall combine with appropriate
walks and street surfaces to provide an attractive development
pattern. Landscape materials selected should be appropriate
to the growing conditions of the Town of Barnstable's
environment.
(b)
(3)
Circulation system design standards.
There shall be an adequate, safe and convenient arrangement
of pedestrian circulation facilities, roadways, driveways, offstreet
parking and loading space.
(a)
Road, pedestrian walks and open space shall be designed as an
integral part of an overall site design. They shall be properly
related to existing and proposed buildings, and appropriately
landscaped.
(b)
There shall be an adequate amount, in a suitable location,
of pedestrian walks and landscaped spaces to discourage
pedestrian use of vehicular ways and parking spaces and to
(c)
(4)
§ 240-40.1 WASTEWATER DISCHARGE § 240-40.1
232:483
separate pedestrian walks and public transportation loading
places from general vehicular circulation facilities.
Buildings and vehicular circulation open spaces shall be
arranged so that pedestrians moving between buildings are not
unnecessarily exposed to vehicular traffic.
(d)
Landscaped, paved and comfortably graded pedestrian walks
shall be provided along the lines of the most intense use,
particularly from building entrances to street, parking areas
and adjacent buildings.
(e)
The location and design of pedestrian walks should emphasize
desirable views of new and existing development in the area.
(f)
Encourage the maximum separation of private automobiles
and service vehicles through the use of separate service lanes.
(g)
Materials and design of paving, lighting fixtures, retaining
walls, fences, curbs, benches, etc., shall be of good
appearance, easily maintained, and indicative of their function.
(h)
Parking and loading design standards.
Parking facilities shall be landscaped and screened from public
view to the extent necessary to eliminate unsightliness and
monotony of parked cars.
(a)
Parking facilities shall be designed with careful regard to
orderly arrangement, topography, landscaping and ease of
access, and shall be developed as an integral part of an overall
site design.
(b)
Any above-grade loading facility should be screened from
public view to the extent necessary to eliminate unsightliness.
(c)
(d) Outdoor storage shall not be permitted.
(5)
§ 240-40.1 BARNSTABLE CODE § 240-40.1
232:484
ARTICLE IV
Supplemental Provisions
§ 240-41. Vision clearance on corner lots.
In residential districts, on corner lots, no fence, wall or structure, planting
or foliage more than three feet in height above the plan of the established
grades of the streets shall be allowed in any part of a front or side yard
herein established, that is included within the street lines at points which
are 20 feet distant from their point of intersection measured along said
street lines which will materially obstruct the view of a driver of a vehicle
approaching a street intersection.
§ 240-42. Planning Board standards/certain subdivisions.
The Planning Board, as part of its review of subdivisions within 500 feet of
the major arteries known as Routes 28, 132, 149 and West Main Street, is
hereby authorized to:
Prescribe, in distance and composition, a vegetation buffer strip
between said major arteries and a proposed subdivision.
A.
Locate streets within a proposed subdivision so that:
Ingress and egress onto the aforementioned major arteries is safe,
efficient and convenient;
(1)
A minimum number of roads intersect any such artery. Roads
intersecting a major artery on the same side of the artery should, if
possible, be not less than 500 feet apart between side lines. Roads
intersecting a major artery on the opposite sides of such an artery
should, if possible, be not less than 150 feet between center lines.
(2)
B.
§ 240-41 WASTEWATER DISCHARGE § 240-42
232:485

ARTICLE V
Accessory Uses
§ 240-43. Incidental and subordinate nature of accessory uses.
Within the zoning districts established herein, accessory uses or accessory
buildings are permitted, provided that any such use or building is
customarily incidental to, subordinate to and on the same lot as the
principal use it serves except as otherwise provided for herein.
§ 240-44. Accessory uses permitted with special permit.
The following accessory uses are permitted, provided that a special permit
is first obtained from the Board of Appeals:
§ 240-44.1. Land-based wind energy conversion facilities (WECFs).
[Added 6-14-2007 by Order No. 2007-082]
In residential zoning districts, accessory uses and structures on a lot
adjoining or immediately opposite and across a road from the lot on
which the principal use it serves is located, provided that both lots are
retained in identical ownership with respect to both fee and nonfee
interests.
A.
Uses accessory to permitted scientific research or scientific
development or related production only if the Board finds that such
accessory use does not substantially derogate from the public good.
Such accessory use need not be located on the same lot as the principal
use it serves.
B.
Other accessory uses requiring special permit authorization are
provided for within the various zoning districts established herein.
C.
Purpose and intent. It is the express purpose of this section to
accommodate distributed wind energy conversion facilities in
appropriate land-based locations, while minimizing any adverse visual,
safety and environmental impacts of the facilities. The section enables
the review of wind energy conversion facilities by the Town's special
permit granting authority, clarifying the criteria for siting such a
facility. This section is intended to be used in conjunction with other
regulations adopted by the Town, including historic district regulations,
site plan review and other local ordinances designed to encourage
appropriate land use and environmental protection. Further, it is the
express intent of this section that any special permit granted hereunder
run with the land and that any subsequent owner of said land be bound
by the terms and conditions of said special permit.
A.
Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
CLEAR AREA — The distance from the lowest point of the blade tip to
the ground.
B.
§ 240-43 WASTEWATER DISCHARGE § 240-44.1
232:487
HEIGHT — Height is measured from the grade at the base of the tower
to the top of the fixed tower (moveable blades are not included).
LAND-BASED — Wholly located on upland including any guy wires as
may be required.
SPECIAL PERMIT GRANTING AUTHORITY (SPGA) — Shall be the
Planning Board, for this section.
WIND ENERGY CONVERSION FACILITY (WECF) — All equipment,
machinery and structures utilized in connection with the conversion of
wind to electricity. This includes, but is not limited to, all transmission,
storage, collection and supply equipment, substations, transformers,
site access, service roads and machinery associated with the use. A
wind energy conversion facility may consist of one or more wind
turbines.
WIND-MONITORING OR METEOROLOGICAL (TEST OR MET)
TOWERS — Tower used for supporting anemometer, wind vane and
other equipment to assess the wind resource at a predetermined height
above the ground.
WIND TURBINE — A device that converts kinetic energy of the wind
into rotational energy to turn an electrical generator shaft.
District regulations.
Use regulations.
All wind energy conversion facilities or wind-monitoring
towers shall require a building permit and may be permitted
only as an accessory use to permitted uses in all zoning
districts.
(a)
Wind energy conversion facility and wind-monitoring or
meteorological towers. The construction of any wind energy
conversion facility or wind-monitoring/meteorological tower
shall be permitted in all zoning districts, subject to issuance
of a special permit and provided the proposed use complies
with all dimensional and special permit regulations set forth
in § 240-125C (unless waived by the SPGA). Any subsequent
change or modification of wind energy equipment shall be
subject to review by the Building Commissioner.
(b)
(1)
Dimensional requirements.
Type. Tilt-up towers, fixed-guyed towers, freestanding towers
or other designs may be considered for approval by the SPGA.
Towers may not be attached to any residence or habitable
structures.
(a)
Setback. The base of any WECF shall be set back from any
property line or road layout line by not less than 120% of the
proposed height of the tower if abutting residentially zoned
(b)
(2)
C.
§ 240-44.1 BARNSTABLE CODE § 240-44.1
232:488
properties and 80% of the proposed height of the tower, if
abutting nonresidentially zoned properties. Guy wires or any
WECF related construction not wholly below grade, as may be
required by the proposed design, shall be set back at least 20
feet from property lines, and 30 feet from road layout lines
if located on, or adjacent to, residentially zoned property. If
located on nonresidentially zoned property and not abutting
residentially zoned property, guy wire setbacks may be
reduced to five feet. Other setbacks shall conform to the yard
setbacks of the zone in which the subject property is located.
The SPGA may allow the setback to be reduced as part of
the special permit process if the project proponent can
demonstrate that additional height is needed and that the
additional benefits of the higher tower outweigh any increased
adverse impacts.
Special permit regulations. The SPGA shall grant a special permit only
if it finds that the proposal complies with the provisions of this Zoning
Ordinance (unless waived) and is consistent with the applicable criteria
for granting special permits.
General. Proposed wind energy conversion facilities shall be
consistent with all applicable local, state and federal requirements,
including, but not limited to, all applicable electrical, construction,
noise, safety, environmental and communications requirements.
Demonstrated utility. The proponent shall demonstrate that the
proposed WECF efficiently generates electrical power.
(a)
Maintenance. A written maintenance plan shall be submitted
with the application for a special permit for review and
approval by the SPGA and shall be made a condition of said
special permit.
(b)
(1)
Design standards.
Visual impact. The proponent shall demonstrate through
project siting and proposed mitigation that the wind energy
conversion facility minimizes any impact on the visual
character of surrounding neighborhoods and the community.
This may include, but not be limited to, information regarding
site selection, turbine design, buffering, lighting. All electrical
conduits shall be underground.
(a)
Color. Wind energy conversion facilities shall be painted
nonreflective muted colors that blend with the sky, without
graphics or other decoration.
(b)
Equipment shelters. All equipment necessary for monitoring
and operation of the wind energy conversion facilities should
preferably be contained within the turbine tower. If this is
infeasible, ancillary equipment may be located outside the
(c)
(2)
D.
§ 240-44.1 WASTEWATER DISCHARGE § 240-44.1
232:489
tower, provided it is contained either within an underground
vault, or enclosed within a separate structure or behind a yearround
landscape or vegetated buffer.
Lighting and signage.
Wind turbines shall be lighted only if required by the
Federal Aviation Administration (FAA). The proponent
shall provide a copy of the FAA's determination to
establish the required markings and/or lights for the
structure.
[1]
Lighting of equipment structures and any other facilities
on site (except lighting required by the FAA) shall be
shielded from abutting properties.
[2]
[3] No signage allowed.
(d)
Guy wires. Guy wires as may be utilized in the construction of
the tower shall be left totally unadorned. Nothing shall be hung
from or attached to said wires. To prevent unintended contact
by persons who may be on-site, landscaping or other approved
methods may be implemented. Exception: On nonresidentially
zoned properties, not abutting residential property, guy wires
may be wrapped with a colored sleeve only, to prevent
unintended contact. Such sleeve shall extend to a height not
greater than 10 feet above grade.
(e)
Environmental standards.
Noise.
The wind energy conversion facility and associated
equipment shall conform to the provisions of the
Department of Environmental Protection's Division of Air
Quality Noise Regulations (310 CMR 7.10). A source of
sound will be considered to be violating these regulations
if the source:
Increases the broadband sound level by more than 10
dB(A) above ambient; or
[a]
Produces a pure tone condition: when an octave bank
center frequency sound pressure level exceeds the
two adjacent center frequency sound pressure levels
by three decibels or more.
[b]
[1]
"Ambient" is defined as the background A-weighted sound
level that is exceeded 90% of the time measured during
equipment hours. The ambient may also be established by
other means with consent from DEP. The ambient noise
level shall be measured at the property line when the
WECF is located on a lot adjacent to residentially zoned
[2]
(a)
(3)
§ 240-44.1 BARNSTABLE CODE § 240-44.1
232:490
property. Otherwise, the special permit granting authority,
in consultation with the Department, shall determine
whether such violations shall be measured at the property
line or at the nearest inhabited residence.
Upon complaint of an abutter, ambient and maximum
permitted decibel measurements shall be performed by
an agent designated by the SPGA. The report shall be
submitted to the SPGA for review. The fee for this service
shall be paid by the complainant unless the maximum
permitted decibel level has been exceeded in which case
the owner of the system shall pay the fee.
[3]
If the maximum decibel readings are exceeded, the
installation shall be considered a nuisance. The nuisance
violation must be corrected within 90 days from
notification of the violation, and if the violation cannot be
corrected, the wind energy system shall be removed or
relocated at the expense of the owner.
[4]
Shadowing/flicker. Wind energy conversion facilities shall be
sited in a manner that does not result in significant shadowing
or flicker impacts. The proponent has the burden of proving
that this effect does not have significant adverse impact on
neighboring or adjacent uses either through siting or
mitigation.
(b)
Safety standards.
No hazardous materials or waste shall be discharged on
the site of any wind energy conversion facility. If any
hazardous materials or wastes are to be used on site, there
shall be provisions for full containment of such materials
or waste.
[1]
Climbing access to tower shall be limited by placing
climbing apparatus no lower than 10 feet from the ground.
[2]
[3] The clear area shall be no less than 10 feet.
The wind turbine shall conform to FAA safety standards, as
amended.
[4]
(c)
Condemnation.
Upon a finding by the Building Commissioner that the WECF
has been abandoned or has been left in disrepair or has not
been maintained in accordance with the approved
maintenance plan, the owner of said WECF shall be notified
in writing by certified mail that the WECF shall be brought
up to standard. If required repairs or maintenance are not
accomplished within 45 days, the WECF shall be deemed
(a)
(4)
§ 240-44.1 WASTEWATER DISCHARGE § 240-44.1
232:491
§ 240-44.2. Ground-Mounted Solar Photovoltaic Overlay District.
[Added 10-7-2010 by Order No. 2011-00667]
condemned and shall be removed from the site within 90 days
thereafter at the expense of the property owner. The
aforementioned periods of time may be extended at the
request of the owner and at the discretion of the Building
Commission. "Removed from site" shall mean:
Removal of the wind turbine and tower, all machinery,
equipment, equipment shelters, security barriers and all
appurtenant structures from the subject property;
[1]
Proper disposal of all solid or hazardous materials and
wastes from the site in accordance with local and state
solid waste disposal regulations;
[2]
Restoration of the location of the wind energy conversion
facility to its natural condition, except that any
landscaping, grading or below-grade foundation may
remain in the after condition.
[3]
If an applicant fails to remove a wind energy conversion facility
in accordance with this section of this chapter, the Town shall
have the authority to enter the subject property and physically
remove the facility. The SPGA may require the applicant to
provide a form of surety (i.e., post a bond, letter of credit or
establish an escrow account or other) at the SPGA's election
at the time of construction to cover costs of the removal in
the event the Town must remove the facility. The amount of
such surety shall be equal to 150% of the cost of compliance
with this section. The applicant shall submit a fully inclusive
estimate of the costs associated with removal. The amount
shall include a mechanism for a cost of living adjustment every
five years.
(b)
Purpose.
This section promotes the creation of new large-scale, groundmounted
solar photovoltaic installations by providing standards
for the placement, design, construction, operation, monitoring,
modification and removal of such installations that address public
safety, minimize impacts on scenic, natural and historic resources
and for providing adequate financial assurance for the eventual
decommissioning of such installations. This section ordinance is
adopted pursuant to the Commonwealth of Massachusetts Green
Communities Act.
(1)
A.
67.Editor's Note: Section 3 of this order reads as follows: "A building permit shall be issued
by the Building Commissioner within one year from the date an application submitted is
deemed complete by the Building Commissioner. Failure to issue a building permit within
one year shall not result in a constructive grant."
§ 240-44.1 BARNSTABLE CODE § 240-44.2
232:492
The provisions set forth in this section shall apply to the
construction, operation, and/or repair of large-scale, groundmounted
solar photovoltaic installations.
(2)
Applicability. This section applies to large-scale (250 kW), groundmounted
solar photovoltaic installations proposed to be constructed
after the effective date of this section. This section also pertains to
physical modifications that materially alter the type, configuration, or
size of these installations or related equipment.
B.
District established. A Ground-Mounted Solar Photovoltaic Overlay
District (GMSPOD) is hereby established, and shall be considered as
superimposed over any other districts established by this chapter, and
is shown as an overlay on the Official Zoning Map established pursuant
to § 240-6, Zoning Map
C.
Definitions. These definitions shall apply to § 240-44.2 exclusively:
AS-OF-RIGHT SITING — The ground-mounted solar photovoltaic
installation may proceed without the need for a special permit,
variance, amendment, waiver, or other local discretionary approval. Asof-
right development is subject to Article IX, Site Plan Review. As-ofright
solar photovoltaic installations that are consistent with the Zoning
Ordinance and applicable state and federal law can be reasonably
regulated and approved by the Building Commissioner.
GROUND-MOUNTED SOLAR PHOTOVOLTAIC INSTALLATION — A
large-scale solar photovoltaic (PV) system that is structurally mounted
on the ground, not roof-mounted, and has a nameplate capacity of at
least 250 kW DC.
OFF-GRID SYSTEM — A solar photovoltaic installation where all energy
generated on the installation site is consumed on that site and does not
send any energy into the electrical grid for distribution.
RATED NAMEPLATE CAPACITY — The maximum rated output of
electric power production of the photovoltaic system in direct current
(DC).
D.
Application and review.
Ground-mounted, large-scale solar photovoltaic installations with
250 kW or larger of rated nameplate capacity shall undergo site
plan review pursuant to Article IX, Site Plan Review, prior to
construction, installation or modification as provided in this
section. All plans and maps shall be prepared, stamped and signed
by a professional engineer licensed to practice in Massachusetts.
(1)
Required documents. In addition to the requirements of § 240-102,
Contents of site plan, the project proponent shall provide the
following documents:
(a) A site plan showing:
(2)
E.
§ 240-44.2 WASTEWATER DISCHARGE § 240-44.2
232:493
Property lines and physical features, including roads, for
the project site;
[1]
Proposed changes to the landscape of the site, grading,
vegetation clearing and planting, exterior lighting,
screening vegetation or structures. The square footage
of each disturbed area shall be identified on a plan, and
details of any site alteration, including number and species
of trees to be removed, shall be provided. [Amended
8-17-2017 by Order No. 2018-04]
[2]
Blueprints or drawings of the solar photovoltaic
installation signed by a professional engineer licensed to
practice in the Commonwealth of Massachusetts showing
the proposed layout of the system and any potential
shading from nearby structures;
[3]
One- or three-line electrical diagram detailing the solar
photovoltaic installation, associated components, and
electrical interconnection methods, with all National
Electrical Code compliant disconnects and overcurrent
devices;
[4]
Documentation of the major system components to be
used, including the PV panels, mounting system, and
inverter;
[5]
Name, address, and contact information for proposed
system installer;
[6]
Name, address, phone number and signature of the project
proponent, as well as all co-proponents or property
owners, if any;
[7]
The name, contact information and signature of any agents
representing the project proponent; and
[8]
Documentation of actual or prospective access and control of
the project site (See also Subsection G below.);
(b)
An operation and maintenance plan (See also Subsection H
below.);
(c)
Zoning district designation for the parcel(s) of land comprising
the project site (submission of a copy of a Zoning Map with the
parcel(s) identified is suitable for this purpose);
(d)
Description of financial surety that satisfies Subsection N(3)
below.
(e)
Site control. The project proponent shall submit documentation of
actual or prospective access and control of the project site sufficient to
F.
§ 240-44.2 BARNSTABLE CODE § 240-44.2
232:494
allow for construction and operation of the proposed solar photovoltaic
installation.
Operation and maintenance plan. The project proponent shall submit
a plan for the operation and maintenance of the ground-mounted solar
photovoltaic installation, which shall include specific measures for
maintaining safe access to the installation, a stormwater management
plan, and general procedures for and frequency of operational
maintenance of the installation.
G.
Utility notification. No ground-mounted solar photovoltaic installation
shall receive a building permit until an executed interconnect
agreement with EVERSOURCE, the utility company operating the
electrical grid, has been submitted to the Building Commissioner. Offgrid
systems are exempt from this requirement. [Amended 8-17-2017
by Order No. 2018-04]
H.
Dimensional requirements. Ground-mounted solar photovoltaic
installations are subject to the front, side and rear yard setbacks as set
forth in the underlying zoning district(s).
I.
Design standards.
Lighting. Lighting of solar photovoltaic installations shall be
consistent with local, state and federal law. Lighting of other parts
of the installation, such as accessory structures, shall be limited
to that required for safety and operational purposes, and shall be
reasonably shielded from abutting properties.
(1)
Signage. Signs on large-scale, ground-mounted solar photovoltaic
installations shall comply with Article VII, Sign Regulations. A sign
shall be required to identify the owner and provide a twentyfour-
hour emergency contact phone number. Solar photovoltaic
installations shall not be used for displaying any advertising.
(2)
Accessory structures. All structures accessory to ground-mounted
solar photovoltaic installations shall be subject to reasonable
regulations concerning the bulk and height of structures, lot area,
setbacks, open space, parking and building coverage requirements.
To avoid adverse visual impacts, all such accessory structures,
including but not limited to, equipment shelters, storage facilities,
transformers, and substations, shall be architecturally compatible
with each other, multiple accessory structures shall be clustered
to the greatest extent feasible and views of such structures to
residential properties and roadways shall be screened with
landscaping.
(3)
J.
Utility connections. Reasonable efforts, as determined by site plan
review, shall be made to place all utility connections from the solar
photovoltaic installation underground, depending on appropriate soil
conditions, shape, and topography of the site and any requirements of
K.
§ 240-44.2 WASTEWATER DISCHARGE § 240-44.2
232:495
the utility provider. Electrical transformers for utility interconnections
may be above ground if required by the utility provider.
Safety and environmental standards.
Emergency services. The large-scale solar photovoltaic installation
owner or operator shall provide a copy of the project summary,
electrical schematic, and site plan to the local Fire Chief. Upon
request the owner or operator shall cooperate with local
emergency services in developing an emergency response plan. All
means of shutting down the solar photovoltaic installation shall be
clearly marked. The owner or operator shall identify a responsible
person for public inquiries throughout the life of the installation.
(1)
Land clearing, soil erosion and habitat impacts. Clearing of natural
vegetation shall be limited to what is necessary for the
construction, operation and maintenance of the large-scale,
ground-mounted solar photovoltaic installation or otherwise
prescribed by applicable laws, regulations, and bylaws. [Amended
8-17-2017 by Order No. 2018-04]
Land clearing is prohibited within 800 feet from the outer
boundary of any Zone I protective radius around a public water
supply well or wellfield established by 310 CMR 22.
(a)
Land clearing in excess of two contiguous acres in connection
with any single installation is prohibited.
(b)
No such installation shall be segmented or broken into
separate ownerships so as to avoid the prohibitions of
Subsection L(2)(a) and (b) above.
(c)
(2)
L.
Monitoring and maintenance.
Solar photovoltaic installation conditions. The large-scale, groundmounted
solar photovoltaic installation owner or operator shall
maintain the facility in good condition. Maintenance shall include,
but not be limited to, painting, structural repairs, and integrity
of security measures. Site access shall be maintained to a level
acceptable to site plan review. The owner or operator shall be
responsible for the cost of maintaining the solar photovoltaic
installation.
(1)
Modifications. All material modifications to a solar photovoltaic
installation made after issuance of the required building permit
shall require site plan review approval.
(2)
M.
Abandonment or decommissioning.
Removal requirements. Any large-scale, ground-mounted solar
photovoltaic installation which has reached the end of its useful
life or has been abandoned consistent with this section shall be
removed. The owner or operator shall physically remove the
(1)
N.
§ 240-44.2 BARNSTABLE CODE § 240-44.2
232:496
§ 240-45. Off-street storage of trailers. [Amended 2-22-1996 by
Order No. 95-194]
A mobile home may be stored in a garage or other accessory building or on
the rear half of a lot owned or occupied by the owner of the mobile home.
installation no more than 150 days after the date of discontinued
operations. The owner or operator shall notify the Building
Commissioner by certified mail of the proposed date of
discontinued operations and plans for removal. Decommissioning
shall consist of:
Physical removal of all large-scale, ground-mounted solar
photovoltaic installations, structures, equipment, security
barriers and transmission lines from the site.
(a)
Disposal of all solid and hazardous waste in accordance with
local, state, and federal waste disposal regulations.
(b)
Stabilization or revegetation of the site as necessary to
minimize erosion. The Building Commissioner may allow the
owner or operator to leave landscaping or designated belowgrade
foundations in order to minimize erosion and disruption
to vegetation.
(c)
Abandonment. Absent notice of a proposed date of
decommissioning or written notice of extenuating circumstances,
the solar photovoltaic installation shall be considered abandoned
when it fails to operate for more than one year without the written
consent of the Planning Board. If the owner or operator of the
large-scale, ground-mounted solar photovoltaic installation fails to
remove the installation in accordance with the requirements of this
section within 150 days of abandonment or the proposed date of
decommissioning, the Town may enter the property and physically
remove the installation.
(2)
Financial surety. Proponents of large-scale, ground-mounted solar
photovoltaic projects shall provide a form of surety, either through
escrow account, bond or otherwise, to cover the cost of removal
and disposal in the event the Town must remove the installation
and remediate the landscape, in an amount and in a form
acceptable to the Town Attorney but in no event to exceed more
than 125% of the cost of removal and compliance with the
additional requirements set forth herein, as determined by the
project proponent. Such surety will not be required for municipally
or state-owned facilities. The project proponent shall submit a fully
inclusive estimate of the costs associated with removal, prepared
by a qualified engineer. The amount shall include a mechanism for
pro rating removal costs as they may be affected by inflation or
changes to disposal regulations.
(3)
§ 240-44.2 WASTEWATER DISCHARGE § 240-45
232:497
The location of the mobile home shall comply with the yard requirements of
the zoning district in which it is located.
§ 240-46. Home occupation. [Added 8-17-1995 by Order No. 95-195]
Intent. It is the intent of this section to allow the residents of the
Town of Barnstable to operate a home occupation within single-family
dwellings, subject to the provisions of this section, provided that the
activity shall not be discernible from outside the dwelling; there shall
be no increase in noise or odor; no visible alteration to the premises
which would suggest anything other than a residential use; no increase
in traffic above normal residential volumes; and no increase in air or
groundwater pollution.
A.
After registration with the Building Commissioner, a customary home
occupation shall be permitted as of right subject to the following
conditions:
The activity is carried on by the permanent resident of a singlefamily
residential dwelling unit, located within that dwelling unit.
(1)
(2) The activity is a type customarily carried on within a dwelling unit.
Such use is clearly incidental to and subordinate to the use of the
premises for residential purposes.
(3)
(4) Such use occupies no more than 400 square feet of space.
There are no external alterations to the dwelling which are not
customary in residential buildings, and there is no outside evidence
of such use.
(5)
The use is not objectionable or detrimental to the neighborhood
and its residential character.
(6)
No traffic will be generated in excess of normal residential
volumes.
(7)
The use does not involve the production of offensive noise,
vibration, smoke, dust or other particulate matter, odors, electrical
disturbance, heat, glare, humidity or other objectionable effects.
(8)
There is no storage or use of toxic or hazardous materials, or
flammable or explosive materials, in excess of normal household
quantities.
(9)
Any need for parking generated by such use shall be met on the
same lot containing the customary home occupation, and not within
the required front yard.
(10)
(11)There is no exterior storage or display of materials or equipment.
There are no commercial vehicles related to the customary home
occupation, other than one van or one pickup truck not to exceed
(12)
B.
§ 240-45 BARNSTABLE CODE § 240-46
232:498
one-ton capacity, and one trailer not to exceed 20 feet in length
and not to exceed four tires, parked on the same lot containing the
customary home occupation.
No sign shall be displayed indicating the customary home
occupation.
(13)
If the customary home occupation is listed or advertised as a
business, the street address shall not be included.
(14)
No person shall be employed in the customary home occupation
who is not a permanent resident of the dwelling unit.
(15)
Customary home occupations shall not include such uses similar to,
and including the following:
(a) Barber- and beauty shops.
(b) Commercial stables or kennels.68
(c) Real estate or insurance office.
(d) The sale of retail or wholesale merchandise from the premises.
(e) The sale of antique or secondhand goods.
Service or repair of vehicles, and gasoline or diesel powered
machinery.
(f)
(g) Contractors storage yards.
(h) Veterinary services.
(i) The manufacture of goods using heavy machinery.
(j) Medical or dental practice.
(k) Fortune-telling or palm reading.
(16)
Home occupation by special permit. A home occupation may be
permitted in the RC-1 and RF Single-Family Zoning Districts, provided
that a special permit is first obtained from the Zoning Board of Appeals
subject to the provisions of § 240-125C herein, and subject to the
specific standards for such conditional uses as required in this section:
(1) All of the requirements of Subsection B(1) through (12) above.
There is no more than one nonilluminated wall sign not exceeding
two square feet in area, listing only the occupants' name and
occupation.
(2)
(3) Not more than one nonresident of the household is employed.
C.
68.Editor's Note: See Ch. 376, Stables.
§ 240-46 WASTEWATER DISCHARGE § 240-46
232:499
§ 240-47. Shared elderly housing. [Added 4-27-2000]
The Zoning Board of Appeals may grant special permits to allow for the
use of structures as shared housing to provide care and shelter for persons
with special needs due to age or disability. Said special permits shall be
issued only with respect to owner-occupied single-family residences to be
occupied by not more than six persons not less than 65 years of age or
in approved instances persons of lesser age in need of special care, in
addition to the family residents in the dwelling, and shall be conditioned
upon the maintenance of proper licensed status as a shared residence under
the laws of the commonwealth, and upon such other requirements as the
Zoning Board of Appeals deems appropriate with respect to safety, parking,
screening and other amenities designed to mitigate the impact of the use
upon the neighborhood, and may be conditioned as to time and ownership
in the discretion of the Board.
§ 240-47.1. Family apartments. [Added 11-18-2004 by Order No.
2005-026; amended 10-7-2010 by Order No. 2011-010; 3-1-2018 by
Order No. 2018-053]
The intent of this section is to allow within all residential zoning districts
one temporary family apartment occupied only by the property owner or a
member(s) of the property owner's family as accessory to a single-family
residence to provide families the ability to live together as a family unit,
but not to allow for a separate dwelling for rental purposes to non-family
members. A family apartment may be permitted, provided that there is
compliance with all the criteria, conditions and procedural requirements
herein.
Home occupations shall not include the uses listed in Subsection
B(16) above.
(4)
The Zoning Board of Appeals may permit the home occupation to
be located within an accessory structure located on the same lot as
the single-family residential dwelling unit.
(5)
(6) Approval of site plan review is obtained.
The special permit shall be issued to the applicant only at his or
her residence, and shall not be transferable to another person, or
to another location.
(7)
As of right. A family apartment shall be allowed as of right, provided
that it complies with Subsection C below and satisfies the following
criteria:
The apartment unit shall not exceed 50% of the square footage of
the existing single-family dwelling and shall be limited to no more
than two bedrooms.
(1)
A.
§ 240-46 BARNSTABLE CODE § 240-47.1
232:500
Occupancy of the apartment shall not exceed two family members;
occupancy limitations shall not apply to children ages 18 and
under.
(2)
The family apartment shall be located within a single-family
dwelling or connected to the single-family dwelling in such a
manner as to allow for internal access between the units. The
apartment must comply with all applicable zoning requirements for
the zoning district in which it is located.
(3)
By special permit. The Zoning Board of Appeals may allow by special
permit, subject to the provisions of § 240-125C herein, the following
waivers from the requirements of Subsection A above:
A family apartment unit greater than 50% of the square footage of
the dwelling.
(1)
(2) A family apartment unit with more than two bedrooms.
Occupancy of a family apartment unit by greater than two adult
family members.
(3)
A family apartment unit within a detached structure, with a finding
that the single-family nature of the property and of the accessory
nature of the detached structure are preserved.
(4)
B.
Conditions and procedural requirements. Prior to the creation of a
family apartment, the owner of the property shall make application
for a building permit with the Building Commissioner providing any
and all information deemed necessary to assure compliance with this
section, including, but not limited to, scaled plans of any proposed
remodeling or addition to accommodate the apartment, signed and
recorded affidavits reciting the names and family relationship among
the parties, and a signed family apartment accessory use restriction
document.
Certificate of occupancy. Prior to occupancy of the family
apartment, a certificate of occupancy shall be obtained from the
Building Commissioner. No certificate of occupancy shall be issued
until the Building Commissioner has made a final inspection of
the apartment unit and the single-family dwelling for regulatory
compliance and a copy of the family apartment accessory use
restriction document recorded at the Barnstable Registry of Deeds
is submitted to the Building Division.
(1)
Annual affidavit. Annually thereafter, a family apartment affidavit,
reciting the names and family relationship among the parties and
attesting that there shall be no rental of the principal dwelling or
family apartment unit to any non-family members, shall be signed
and submitted to the Building Division.
(2)
C.
§ 240-47.1 WASTEWATER DISCHARGE § 240-47.1
232:501
At no time shall the single-family dwelling or the family apartment
be sublet or subleased by either the owner or family member(s).
The single-family dwelling and family apartment shall only be
occupied by those persons listed on the recorded affidavit, which
affidavit shall be amended when a change in the family member
occupying either unit occurs.
(3)
When the family apartment is vacated, or upon noncompliance with
any condition or representation made, including but not limited
to occupancy or ownership, the use as an apartment shall be
terminated. All necessary permit(s) must be obtained to remove
either the cooking or bathing facilities (tub or shower) from the
family apartment, and the water and gas service of the utilities
removed, capped and placed behind a finished wall surface; or a
building permit must be obtained to incorporate the floor plan of
the apartment unit back into the principal structure.
(4)
§ 240-47.1 BARNSTABLE CODE § 240-47.1
232:502
ARTICLE VI
Off-Street Parking Regulations
§ 240-48. Purpose.
It is the purpose of this article that all new, expanded or intensified uses
within the Town provide adequate off-street parking.
§ 240-49. Applicability.
No use shall be intensified, except for single-family detached dwellings,
without providing adequate off-street parking as provided herein.
§ 240-50. Computation.
Existing parking spaces may be counted to meet the minimum off-street
parking requirements for an intensified use only if it can be demonstrated
that they are not used as of right by existing uses and are exclusively
available as of right for said proposed intensification.
§ 240-51. Location of parking spaces. [Amended 11-15-2001 by
Order No. 2002-029; 7-21-2016 by Order No. 2016-166]
§ 240-52. Design and screening standards. [Amended 3-11-1999 by
Order No. 99-056]
§ 240-53. Landscape requirements for parking lots.
All off-street parking spaces required by this article shall be located on
the same lot as the use for which such spaces are required, except that
in nonresidential districts, parking spaces may be located on another
lot within 300 feet of, and in the same zoning district as, the use for
which such spaces are required.
A.
Parking facilities, including those governed by § 240-24.1.11. The site
development standards in §§ 240-24.1.11A(4)(d) and 240-24.1.10,
Hyannis Parking Overlay District, may operate parking lots in other
locations and propose shuttle service to transport patrons from these
remote lots to their desired destination. Such proposals shall be subject
to site plan review.
B.
Each off-street parking space shall have minimum dimensions of nine
feet by 20 feet excluding the driveway to such space.
A.
Drainage facilities for each parking area shall be designed and
constructed to contain stormwater runoff on the premises.
B.
Parking areas for five or more cars shall be designed with enough
maneuvering space so that vehicles need not back onto a public way.
C.
No parking lot shall be illuminated so as to cause glare for motorists,
pedestrians or neighboring premises.
D.
§ 240-48 WASTEWATER DISCHARGE § 240-53
232:503
In all Single Family Residential Districts, where a legal use or a
combination of legal uses requires the provision of five or more parking
spaces pursuant to § 240-56, Schedule of Off-Street Parking
Requirements, the following requirements shall apply:
All the requirements of § 240-53, Landscape Requirements of
Parking Lots, Subsections C, D, E and F below; and
(1)
A landscaped setback shall be provided from the surfaced area
of a parking lot and all entrance and exit drives to the road lot
line, a distance equal to the required front yard building setback
requirement, or a maximum of 50 feet, whichever is lesser. Existing
trees and shrubs shall be retained within the road right-of-way
and within the required front yard landscaped setback and
supplemented with other landscape materials, in accordance with
accepted landscape practices. Where natural vegetation cannot
be retained, the required front yard landscaped setback shall be
landscaped with a combination of grasses, trees and shrubs
commonly found on Cape Cod. A minimum of one street tree with
a minimum caliper of three inches shall be provided per 30 feet
of road frontage distributed throughout the front yard setback
area. No plantings shall obscure site at entrance and exit drives
and road intersections. All landscaped areas shall be continuously
maintained, substantially in accordance with any site plan
approved pursuant to Article IX herein.
(2)
A.
In all office and commercial districts, a parking lot shall conform to the
following requirements:
The surfaced area of a parking lot and all entrance and exit drives
shall be set back from the side and rear lot lines, by a landscaped
buffer, as follows: [Amended 6-28-20001 by Order No.
2001-036; 7-19-2001 by Item Nos. 2001-037, 2001-038,
2001-039; 11-15-2001 by Order No. 2002-029]
Landscape Buffer Setbacks (in feet)
to Parking Lots and Drives
Zoning District Side Rear
B-1 Business 5 5
HO Highway Office 10 20
MA-1 Business — 5
MA-2 Business 5 5
O-1, O-2, O-3 Office 5 5
OR Office Residential 5 10
PR Professional Residential 5 5
All other office and commercial districts 10 10
(1)
B.
§ 240-53 BARNSTABLE CODE § 240-53
232:504
Landscape Buffer Setbacks (in feet)
to Parking Lots and Drives
Zoning District Side Rear
Uses requiring 5 or more spaces in singlefamily
residential districts
10 10
A ten-foot minimum, landscaped perimeter buffer shall be
maintained between a building and the surfaced area of a parking
lot or drive, except at entrances, building loading and utility
locations. A walkway may be located within the landscaped
perimeter buffer, provided that the landscape area is not reduced
to less than 40% of the area of the perimeter buffer.
(2)
Screening from residential districts: Where a parking lot
containing five or more spaces abuts a residential district, or is
located across the road from a residential district, it shall be
screened as follows: (a) retention or planting of a sufficient area
of natural vegetation to provide a dense screen; and/or (b) a dense
hedge providing year-round screening, and/or (c) where vegetative
screening is not practical, a fence, with not more than 50% open
space between the panels. Such screening shall be maintained in
good condition at all times, and no advertising shall be placed upon
the screening. In an Historic District, fences and hedges may be
subject to other regulation.
(3)
In all office and commercial districts, at least 10% of the interior of
a parking lot with 21 or more parking spaces shall be landscaped.
Planting along the perimeter of a parking area shall not be considered
as part of the 10% interior landscaping. Interior landscaped islands
shall be distributed throughout the parking lot. At least one tree with a
minimum three-inch caliper or larger shall be provided per eight spaces
or any portion thereof, located within interior landscaped islands.
Existing naturally occurring trees in good condition located in
landscaped islands shall be credited towards this requirement only in
those areas where the existing trees are located. No landscaped island
shall have an overall width of less than six feet, except that in parking
lots with 51 or more parking spaces, the overall width of islands shall
be no less than 10 feet. A walkway may be located within an interior
landscaped island, provided that the walkway is separated from the
surfaced area of the drive or parking lot by a minimum of four feet of
landscaped area. The interior landscape requirements of Subsection D
herein shall not apply to parking lots used for sale and/or display of
motor vehicles.
C.
In all industrial districts, and in marine business districts, a parking lot
with 21 or more parking spaces shall comply with the requirements of
Subsections B(2) and (3) and C and E herein, except where a parking
lot is also used for loading, material storage, or parking of trucks, boat
storage and other equipment associated with the following uses: light
D.
§ 240-53 WASTEWATER DISCHARGE § 240-53
232:505
industry, warehouse and distribution, contractor service establishments
and commercial marinas. [Amended 7-19-2001 by Order No.
2001-099]
Where landscaped setbacks to parking areas, landscaped buffers to
buildings, and landscaped islands within parking areas are required in
Subsections B, C and D above, the following requirements shall apply:
Existing natural trees and shrubs shall be retained within
landscaped islands, and side and rear yard landscaped buffers to
parking lots and drives wherever possible and supplemented with
other landscape materials, in accordance with accepted landscape
practices. Specimen trees shall be retained and, if practical,
relocated within the site where necessary. Where natural
vegetation cannot be retained, these areas shall be landscaped
with a combination of low-maintenance grasses, trees and shrubs
commonly found on Cape Cod. A list of recommended plant
materials is on file with the Town Clerk and may also be obtained
from the Planning Department. Plant materials shall be of sufficient
size and density to create an attractive appearance. Brick or stone
mulch shall not be used in place of ground covers in landscaped
islands. Where mulch is used, it shall be in such a manner that it
will not wash into leaching catch basins located in a parking lot, or
adjacent roadway.
(1)
All landscaped areas shall be continuously maintained,
substantially in accordance with any site plan approved pursuant to
Article IX herein. No occupancy certificate shall be issued until the
landscape plan has been implemented according to an approved
site plan, except that the Building Commissioner may issue an
occupancy certificate prior to installation of landscape materials,
provided that the applicant posts security with the Town for 150%
of the estimated cost of installation and plant materials.
(2)
E.
The preceding requirements of this § 240-53 shall not apply to parking
lots constructed and in use prior to March 11, 1999, which conformed
to all applicable regulations when established, except whenever there
is:
An expansion of an existing parking lot containing 21 or more
parking spaces; and/or
(1)
An alteration of a structure, or a change or extension of a use
created prior to March 11, 1999, which increases the parking
requirements by five or more spaces according to the standards of
§ 240-56, Schedule of Off-Street Parking Requirements;
(2)
F.
§ 240-53 BARNSTABLE CODE § 240-53
232:506
§ 240-54. Location of parking lot in relationship to buildings.
[Amended 3-11-1999 by Order No. 99-056]
Parking lots shall be located to the rear or side of a building unless such
location would have an adverse environmental impact or is infeasible due to
configuration of the site.
§ 240-55. Conflicting provisions.
Any specific provision in any other section of this chapter relating to parking
shall prevail over the provisions of this section.
§ 240-56. Schedule of Off-Street Parking Requirements. [Amended
11-5-1988 by Art. 1]
The following standards represent the minimum parking requirements to be
applied as provided for herein:
Use Required Spaces
Attached dwelling units (D.U.) 1.5/D.U.+ 1 visitor space/10 required
D.U. spaces
Guesthouse, lodging house,
group accommodation, bedand-
breakfast
1.2/bedroom
Hotel/motel guest units 1.2/guest unit + 1/every 2 employees
on maximum shift
Nursing homes/hospitals 1/every 3 beds
Industry, warehousing, storage,
distribution, wholesaling
1/700 sq. ft. gross floor area or 1/every
1.3 employees on maximum shift,
whichever is greater
The entire parking lot shall be brought into compliance with
§ 240-53 herein; and the front yard landscaped setback
requirement, if any, in accordance with the applicable zoning
district bulk regulations. For the purpose of this subsection only,
a development containing several different business enterprises
sharing a common parking lot or lots shall be considered to be one
use.
Reduction of parking and/or landscape buffers for parking lots
created prior to March 11, 1999. The number of parking spaces
required in § 240-56 may be reduced by the number of spaces
lost to the installation of landscape buffers and traffic islands.
Alternatively or in addition thereto, landscape buffers and islands
may be reduced sufficient to ensure the creation of a functional,
attractive parking lot, subject to approval of site plan review. This
provision shall only apply to parking lots subject to § 240-53F
herein. [Amended 3-11-1999 by Order No. 99-056]
(3)
§ 240-53 WASTEWATER DISCHARGE § 240-56
232:507
Use Required Spaces
Retail, consumer service 1/200 sq. ft. gross floor area + 1/
separate enterprise
Office, professional,
administrative, banks
1/300 sq. ft. gross floor area + 1/
separate suite
Restaurants, licensed common
victualer or purveyor of food
ready to be consumed on or off
premises
1/every 3 seats + 1/every 2 employees
+ 5/take-out area
Places of public assembly 1/every 3 persons capacity
Bowling alley 4/alley
Tennis, handball and
racquetball courts
3/court, except 0 when a single court
is located as accessory to a singlefamily
dwelling
Laundromats 1/every 4 machines
Gas/service stations 3/service bay or 1/100 sq. ft. gross
floor area, whichever is greater
All other uses As determined by the Building
Commissioner
§ 240-57. Circumstances warranting reduction of requirements.
[Amended 11-5-1988 by Art. 1]
The Zoning Board of Appeals may reduce the requirements of this article by
the granting of a special permit only if lesser off-street parking is shown to
be adequate given such special circumstances as:
§ 240-58. Reduction of parking within the MA-1 and MA-2 Business
Districts. [Added 7-19-2001 by Item Nos. 2001-037, 2001-038,
2001-039; amended 11-15-2001 by Order No. 2002-029]
Use of a common parking area by different uses having different peak
hours of demand.
A.
B. Age or other characteristics of occupants which reduce auto usage.
Characteristics of use invalidating normal methods of calculating
parking demand.
C.
D. Supplementary parking provided off premises.
Within the MA-1 and MA-2 Business Districts, a permitted use can be
changed to another permitted use, and a use can be intensified, without
increasing the required off-street parking requirements of § 240-56,
Schedule of Off-Street Parking Requirements, herein, provided that as
of September 15, 2001, there is:
(1) No increase in gross square footage of the building; and
A.
§ 240-56 BARNSTABLE CODE § 240-58
232:508
No reduction in existing parking spaces required pursuant to
§ 240-56; and
(2)
There is no added outdoor use requiring the provision of parking
according to § 204-56, except that no parking spaces shall be
required for outdoor dining on both public and private property;
except
(3)
That in the MA-1 Business District, the following requirements
shall apply to apartments:
(a) One parking space per one-bedroom apartment unit;
(b) Two parking spaces per apartment unit with two bedrooms.
(4)
Within the MA-1 Business District, parking spaces shall be provided
for new and/or expanded building area, and for new and/or expanded
outdoor uses, as follows:
Fifty percent of the spaces required under § 240-56 for all uses
other than apartments.
(1)
Parking spaces requirements for apartments shall be according to
Subsection A(4) above.
(2)
B.
The Zoning Board of Appeals may by special permit, further reduce the
parking required within the MA-1 Business District as follows:
Off-site parking. Parking requirements may be satisfied if an offstreet
municipal parking lot of 20 spaces or more exists within 500
feet of the proposed use.
(1)
C.
§ 240-58 WASTEWATER DISCHARGE § 240-58
232:509

ARTICLE VII
Sign Regulations
§ 240-59. Statement of intent.
The provisions of this article establish the comprehensive regulations,
conditions and limitations under which signs are permitted in the Town of
Barnstable. It is intended that these regulations shall be held to be the
minimum regulations necessary for the protection of the visual environment
of the Town and the public safety, convenience and welfare and shall be
narrowly construed and strictly applied in favor of the public interest to
those ends.
§ 240-60. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ABANDONED SIGN — A sign which no longer identifies or advertises a
bona fide business, lessor, service, owner, product or activity and/or for
which no legal owner can be found.
ANIMATED SIGN — Any sign which uses movement or change of lighting to
depict action or to create a special effect or scene.
AREA (OF A SIGN) — (See § 240-62 herein).
BANNER — A sign made of fabric or any nonrigid material with no enclosing
framework.
BILLBOARD — (See "off-premises sign.")
BUILDING COMMISSIONER — The Building Commissioner of the Town of
Barnstable or his designee.
BUILDING SIGN — A sign affixed to and wholly supported by an exterior
wall of a building or structure.
BUSINESS AREA SIGNS — An off-premises sign intended to direct the
motoring public to specific commercial areas only, and not to include
individual businesses.
CANOPY OR ARCADE SIGN — A wall-mounted sign attached to or
constructed on the face of a permanent roofed structure covering an area
customarily used for pedestrian circulation.
CHANGEABLE-COPY SIGN — A sign that is designed so that characters,
letters or illustrations can be changed or rearranged either manually or
automatically without altering the face or the service of the sign.
CONSTRUCTION SIGN — A temporary sign identifying an architect,
contractor, subcontractor, material supplier or others participating in the
construction on the property on which the sign is located.
DIRECT LIGHTING — Illumination by means of an external source.
§ 240-59 WASTEWATER DISCHARGE § 240-60
232:511
DIRECTIONAL/INFORMATION SIGN — An on-premises sign identifying a
premises or activity conducted upon such premises, and providing direction
for the safe and efficient flow of vehicular or pedestrian traffic to such
activity or premises. Directional signs shall include signs marking
entrances, exits, parking areas, loading areas or other operational features
of the premises.
DISCONTINUED SIGN — (See "abandoned sign.")
DOUBLE-FACED SIGN — A sign with two faces or panels, neither of which
is visible at the same time and are directly back to back as opposed to a Vshaped
sign.
ELECTRONIC MESSAGE CENTER — A sign on which the copy changes
automatically on a lampbank or through mechanical means, e.g., electrical
or electronic time-and-temperature units.
EXTERNALLY ILLUMINATED SIGN — A sign whose illumination is derived
entirely from an external artificial source.
FACADE — The entire building front, including the parapet.
FLASHING SIGN — A sign which contains an intermittent or sequential
flashing light source used primarily to attract attention. This does not
include changeable-copy signs, animated signs or signs which, through
reflection or other means, create an illusion of flashing or intermittent light.
(Compare "animated sign.")
FREESTANDING SIGN — A sign supported upon the ground by poles or
braces and not attached to any building.
FRONTAGE — The length of the property line of any one premises along a
public right-of-way on which it borders.
GOVERNMENT SIGN — Any temporary or permanent sign erected and
maintained by the Town, county, state or federal government for traffic
direction or for designation of or direction to any school, hospital, historic
site or public service, property or facility.
HEIGHT (OF A SIGN) — The vertical distance measured from the highest
point of the sign to the average ground grade beneath the sign.
IDENTIFICATION SIGN — A sign whose copy is limited to the name and
address of the building, institution or person and/or activity or occupation
being identified.
ILLEGAL SIGN — A sign which does not meet the requirements of this
chapter and which has not received legal nonconforming status.
INDIRECT LIGHTING — Illumination by means of a concealed light source,
whereby all incandescent or fluorescent devices are shielded from view by
opaque or translucent materials, and including reflected lighting.
INTERNALLY ILLUMINATED SIGN — Illumination by means of a light
source completely enclosed by the sign panel(s).
INTERMITTENT LIGHTING — (See "flashing sign.")
§ 240-60 BARNSTABLE CODE § 240-60
232:512
LOCATION HARDSHIP SIGN — [Added 6-17-2010 by Order No.
2010-123]
MAINTENANCE (OF A SIGN) — The cleaning, painting, repair or
replacement of defective parts of a sign in a manner that does not alter the
basic copy, design or structure of the sign.
MENU SIGNS — The menu normally presented at tableside.
MULTIPLE-FACED SIGNS — Signs containing more than two faces or
panels.
NEON SIGN — A neon sign is made of glass tubes filled with an inert gas,
such as neon or argon, electrified to produce illumination. This provision
is an exception to § 240-24.1.10A(6).[Added 6-20-2013 by Order No.
2013-133]
NONCONFORMING SIGN — Sign which was erected legally, but which
does not comply with subsequently enacted regulations.
OFF-PREMISES SIGN — A sign structure advertising an establishment,
merchandise, service or entertainment which is not sold, provided,
manufactured or furnished at the property on which said sign is located,
e.g., "billboards," "outdoor advertising" or "off-site signs."
ON-PREMISES SIGN — A sign which pertains to the use of the premises on
which it is located and maintained.
OPEN/CLOSED SIGN — A sign indicating whether a business is open or
closed. A business in the HVB may display a neon open/closed sign, as
defined herein, indicating whether it is open or closed. Open/closed signs
are not counted towards the amount of signage allowed. [Added
6-17-2010 by Order No. 2010-123; amended 6-20-2013 by Order No.
2013-133]
OPEN HOUSE DIRECTIONAL SIGN — A temporary sign to be displayed
only for real estate open house events staffed by real estate professionals
A temporary portable sign allowed in the HVB for a business
demonstrating a location hardship, as further defined herein, to identify
and/or direct patrons to their business. Such locations are ones where:
A permitted sign is not visible due to substantial obstruction(s)
outside the control or ownership of the business owner, including
but not limited to other signs, awnings, trees in leaf, outdoor dining
or other business appurtenances or where building facades are
excessively setback; or
(1)
Due to the location on an upper floor the business is unable to
display a trade figure or symbol or a trade flag; or
(2)
Where, due to the upper floor location, the visibility of other
permitted signage is substantially reduced.
(3)
A.
Hardship location signs are not counted toward the amount of signage
allowed.
B.
§ 240-60 WASTEWATER DISCHARGE § 240-60
232:513
such as brokers or agents. Such directional signs shall not exceed 24 inches
by 24 inches in size, may be two-sided and shall display a directional
arrow in addition to any other sign display.[Added 5-5-2011 by Order No.
2011-046]
OPEN HOUSE SIGN — A temporary sign to be displayed only for real
estate open house events where real estate professionals such as brokers or
agents are present at the open house. Such signs shall not exceed 24 inches
by 24 inches in size and may be two-sided A-frame or panel signs.[Added
5-5-2011 by Order No. 2011-046]
PAINTED WALL SIGN — A sign which is applied with paint or similar
substance on the face of a wall; such sign shall be considered a wall sign for
calculation purposes.
PORTABLE SIGN — Any sign designed to be moved easily and not
permanently affixed to the ground or to a structure or building.
PRIVATE WAY — For the purposes of this Article VII, a private way shall be
considered a public way. (See "public way.")
PROJECTING SIGN — A sign other than a flat wall sign which is attached
to and projects from a building wall or other structure not specifically
designed to support the sign and is not parallel to the structure to which it
is attached.
PUBLIC SERVICE INFORMATION SIGN — Any sign intended exclusively
to promote items of general interest to the community, such as time,
temperature, date, atmospheric conditions, news or travel control.
PUBLIC WAY — Any roadway over which everyone has rights to pass,
including Town ways and private ways.
REAL ESTATE SIGN — A temporary sign advertising real estate upon which
the sign is located as being for rent, lease or sale.
ROOF SIGN — Any sign erected upon a roof and wholly or partially
supported by the sign structure placed upon the roof.
ROTATING SIGN — Any sign or device which has any visible moving part,
visible revolving part, or visible mechanical movement but not including
methods of changing copy.
SIGN — Any permanent or temporary structure, light, letter, word, model,
banner, pennant, insignia, trade flag, representation or any other device
which is used to advertise, inform or attract the attention of the public and
which is designed to be seen from outside a building, including all signs in
windows or doors but not including window displays of merchandise.
SPECIAL EVENT SIGN — A temporary sign advertising or pertaining to any
civic, patriotic or special event of general public interest taking place within
the Town.
STREET BANNER SIGN — Any banner which is stretched across and hung
over a public right-of-way.
§ 240-60 BARNSTABLE CODE § 240-60
232:514
SUBDIVISION IDENTIFICATION SIGN — A freestanding or wall sign
identifying a recognized subdivision, condominium complex or residential
development.
TEMPORARY SIGN — A sign not constructed or intended for long-term use.
TRADE FIGURE OR SYMBOL — A three-dimensional representation of
a business that is used to indicate the type of merchandise or services
offered by the business. Trade figures or symbols shall be still and silent.
Business trade figures are not counted towards the amount of signage
allowed.[Added 6-17-2010 by Order No. 2010-123]
Trade
Figure
or
Symbol
Example
Butcher
Shop
TRADE FLAG — Any sign consisting of lightweight fabric that is affixed
to a pole displaying letters, designs or icons exemplary of the business
displaying the flag. Such images shall be consistent with the historical
heritage and character of village or neighborhood in which it is
displayed.[Added 6-17-2010 by Order No. 2010-123; amended
5-5-2011 by Order No. 2011-047]
UNDER-CANOPY SIGN — A directional sign suspended beneath a canopy,
ceiling, roof or marquee.
V-SHAPED SIGN — A sign with two faces or panels not supported by one
common structural member and which faces are not back-to-back.
WALL SIGN — A sign attached parallel to and extending not more than
18 inches from the wall of a building, including painted signs, individual
lettered signs, cabinet signs and signs on a mansard.
WINDOW SIGN — A sign installed inside a window and intended to be
viewed from the outside.
§ 240-61. Prohibited signs.
The following signs shall be expressly prohibited in all zoning districts,
contrary provisions of this chapter notwithstanding:
Any sign, all or any portion of which is set in motion by movement,
including pennants, banners or flags, with the exception of trade flags
pursuant to § 240-72 and at the entrance to subdivisions where
A.
§ 240-60 WASTEWATER DISCHARGE § 240-61
232:515
developed and undeveloped lots are offered for initial sale and official
flags of nations or administrative or political subdivisions thereof.
[Amended 6-17-2010 by Order No. 2010-123; 5-5-2011 by Order
No. 2011-046; 5-5-2011 by Order No. 2011-047]
Any sign which incorporates any flashing, moving or intermittent
lighting. Such signs include LED (light emitting diode) signs; LED
border tube signs, including any sign that incorporates or consists
solely of a LED border tube lighting system; and simulated neon signs
which are extremely bright backlit signs using fluorescent lamps and
neon colored inks or translucent vinyl for lettering and display.
[Amended 6-17-2010 by Order No. 2010-123]
B.
Any display lighting by strings or tubes of lights, including lights which
outline any part of a building or which are affixed to any ornamental
portion thereof, except that temporary traditional holiday decorations
of strings of small lights shall be permitted between November 15 and
January 15 of the following year. Such temporary holiday lighting shall
be removed by January 15.
C.
Any sign which contains the words "Danger" or "Stop" or otherwise
presents or implies the need or requirement of stopping or caution,
or which is an imitation of, or is likely to be confused with any sign
customarily displayed by a public authority.
D.
Any sign which infringes upon the area necessary for visibility on
corner lots.
E.
Any sign which obstructs any window, door, fire escape, stairway, ladder
or other opening intended to provide light, air or egress from any
building.
F.
Any sign or lighting which casts direct light or glare upon any property
in a residential or professional residential district.
G.
Any portable sign, with the exception of a location hardship sign in
the HVB, including any sign displayed on a stored vehicle, except
for temporary political signs. [Amended 6-17-2010 by Order No.
2010-123]
H.
Any sign which obstructs the reasonable visibility of or otherwise
distracts attention from a sign maintained by a public authority.
I.
Any sign or sign structure involving the use of motion pictures or
projected photographic scenes or images.
J.
Any sign attached to public or private utility poles, trees, signs or other
appurtenances located within the right-of-way of a public way.
K.
A sign painted upon or otherwise applied directly to the surface of a
roof.
L.
§ 240-61 BARNSTABLE CODE § 240-61
232:516
§ 240-62. Determination of area of a sign.
§ 240-63. Signs in residential districts. [Amended 2-20-1997]
In residential districts, only the following signs are permitted:
Signs advertising products, sales, events or activities which are tacked,
painted or otherwise attached to poles, benches, barrels, buildings,
traffic signal boxes, posts, trees, sidewalks, curbs, rocks and windows
regardless of construction or application, except as otherwise
specifically provided for herein.
M.
Signs on or over Town property, except as authorized by the Building
Commissioner for temporary signs for nonprofit, civic, educational,
charitable and municipal agencies.
N.
Signs that will obstruct the visibility of another sign which has the
required permits and is otherwise in compliance with this chapter.
O.
Off-premises signs except for business area signs as otherwise provided
for herein.
P.
Any sign, picture, publication, display of explicit graphics or language
or other advertising which is distinguished or characterized by
emphasis depicting or describing sexual conduct or sexual activity as
defined in MGL Ch. 272, § 31, displayed in windows, or upon any
building, or visible from sidewalks, walkways, the air, roads, highways,
or a public area.
Q.
The area of the sign shall be considered to include all lettering, wording
and accompanying designs and symbols, together with the background,
whether open or enclosed, on which they are displayed.
A.
The area of signs painted upon or applied to a building shall include
all lettering, wording and accompanying designs or symbols together
with any background of a different color than the finish material or the
building face.
B.
When a sign consists of individual letters or symbols attached to or
painted on a surface, wall or window, the area shall be that of the
smallest rectangle which encompasses all of the letters and symbols.
C.
Only one side of a double-faced sign shall be counted in computing the
area of that sign.
D.
For the purposes of these regulations, the area of a building face or wall
shall be calculated by using a height of no more than 10 feet from the
ground multiplied by the width of the building front.
E.
One sign displaying the street number and identifying the premises
not to exceed two square feet in area. The street number must be
approved by the Engineering Department in conformance with the
Town's regulations governing numbering of buildings.69
A.
§ 240-61 WASTEWATER DISCHARGE § 240-63
232:517
§ 240-64. Signs in Medical Services District. [Amended 7-14-2005
by Order No. 2005-100]
§ 240-65. Signs in B, UB, HB, HO, S&D, SD-1 and GM Districts.
[Amended 8-15-1991; 7-15-1999; 6-20-2013 by Order No. 2013-133;
4-27-2017 by Order No. 2017-100]
One sign no larger than four square feet in area shall be allowed which
displays the name of the house or the name of the family residing
therein.
B.
One sign not to exceed two square feet in area shall be permitted for
a professional office or home occupation for which a special permit or
variance has been granted by the Board of Appeals.
C.
One temporary sign not to exceed four square feet in area advertising
property for sale, lease or rent. Such signs must be removed within 10
days of transfer of title or signing of lease or rental agreement.
D.
Where a legal nonconforming business exists within a residential
district, one sign may be permitted by the Building Commissioner if it
is determined that the appearance, placement, size and lighting of the
proposed sign will not be detrimental to the residential character or
visual quality of the area. In no instance shall such signs exceed eight
feet in height or eight square feet in area.
E.
Permits may be posted at construction sites as required by state or
Town regulations, except that in no instance shall they be attached to
trees or utility poles.
F.
One identification sign not to exceed 12 square feet in area may be
permitted at any public entrance to a subdivision or multifamily
development.
G.
Illuminated signs within residential zones require the approval of the
Building Commissioner, and may be permitted if the applicant can
demonstrate that the proposed illumination will not intrude upon
adjacent residential areas, will not be illuminated except during actual
hours of business, and will not cause traffic hazards.
H.
One identifying sign for lodging houses, bed-and-breakfast or similar
identification not to exceed four square feet in area.
I.
One sign giving the name of the occupant or other identification of a
permitted use in a professional residential zone may be permitted. Such
signs shall be no more than 12 square feet in area and shall not extend
more than eight feet above the ground.
A.
Any illuminated sign must comply with the provisions of § 240-63
herein.
B.
69.Editor's Note: See Ch. 51, Buildings, Numbering of.
§ 240-63 BARNSTABLE CODE § 240-65
232:518
A. Each business may be allowed a total of two signs.
The maximum height of any freestanding sign will be 10 feet, except
that a height of up to 12 feet may be allowed by the Building
Commissioner if it is determined that the additional height will be in
keeping with the scale of the building and will not detract from the
appearance or safety of the area and will not obscure existing signs that
conform to these regulations and have a Town permit.
B.
The area of all signs for each individual business establishment shall
not exceed 10% of the area of the building facade associated with
the business establishment that contains the establishment's primary
customer entrance or 100 square feet, whichever is the lesser amount.
In instances where multiple business establishments share a customer
entrance on the same facade, the total square footage for all signs of
all business establishments attached to each facade shall not exceed
10% of the total area of the facade associated with the business
establishments that contains the establishments' shared customer
entrance or 100 square feet, whichever is the lesser amount.
[Amended 4-17-2014 by Order No. 2014-047]
C.
Only one freestanding sign is allowed per business, which may not
exceed half the allowable size as permitted in this section.
D.
One projecting overhanging sign may be permitted per business in
lieu of either a freestanding or wall sign, provided that the sign does
not exceed six square feet in area, is no higher than 10 feet from the
ground at its highest point and is secured and located so as to preclude
its becoming a hazard to the public. Any sign projecting onto Town
property must have adequate public liability insurance coverage, and
proof of such insurance must be provided to the Building Commissioner
prior to the granting of a permit for such sign.
E.
Incidental business signs indicating the business, hours of operation,
credit cards accepted, business affiliations, "sale" signs and other
temporary signs shall be permitted so long as the total area of all such
signs does not exceed four square feet and is within the allowable
maximum square footage permitted for each business.
F.
When a business property is located on two or more public ways, the
Building Commissioner may allow a second freestanding sign, so long
as the total square footage of all signs for a single business does not
exceed the provisions of this section.
G.
When two or more businesses are located on a single lot, only one
freestanding sign shall be allowed for that lot, except as provided in
this section, in addition to one wall or awning sign for each business. If
approved by the Building Commissioner, the one freestanding sign can
include the names of all businesses on the lot.
H.
§ 240-65 WASTEWATER DISCHARGE § 240-65
232:519
§ 240-65.1. Signs in BA Districts. [Added 6-20-2013 by Order No.
2013-133]
One awning or canopy sign may be permitted per business in lieu of the
allowable wall or freestanding sign, subject to approval by the Building
Commissioner.
I.
In addition to the allowable signs as specified in this section each
restaurant may have a menu sign or board not to exceed three square
feet.
J.
In lieu of a wall sign, one roof sign shall be permitted per business,
subject to the following requirements:
The roof sign shall be located above the eave, and shall not project
below the eave, or above a point located 2/3 of the distance from
the eave to the ridge.
(1)
(2) The roof sign shall be no higher than 1/5 of its length.
K.
Business identification signs.
(1) Each business establishment is allowed two signs.
The area of all signs for each individual business establishment
shall not exceed 10% of the area of the building facade associated
with the business establishment that contains the establishment's
primary customer entrance or 100 square feet, whichever is the
lesser amount.
(2)
In instances where multiple business establishments share a
customer entrance on the same facade, the following requirements
shall apply:
The total square footage for all signs of all business
establishments attached to each facade shall not exceed 10%
of the total area of the facade associated with the business
establishments that contains the establishments' shared
customer entrance or 100 square feet, whichever is the lesser
amount.
(a)
In instances where a building facade with a shared customer
entrance does not have a ground-floor window belonging to
each and all business establishments within the building, the
following additional requirements shall apply:
Business establishments with a window on the ground
floor of the building facade that includes a shared
customer entrance shall be allowed one sign attached to
that building facade.
[1]
Up to two directory signs shall be allowed for all
businesses within the building. That sign may have
[2]
(b)
(3)
A.
§ 240-65 BARNSTABLE CODE § 240-65.1
232:520
multiple panels for each business tenant within the
building. The total size of the directory sign(s) shall not
exceed 20 square feet.
Additional standards for each sign type. In addition to the number
and size limitations of Subsection (A), signs shall be subject to
the following requirements. The most restrictive requirement shall
apply.
Wall signs.
The maximum size of a wall sign shall not exceed 50
square feet.
[1]
(a)
Projecting signs.
The maximum size of a projecting sign shall not exceed six
square feet.
[1]
[2] The sign may be double-faced.
The bottom of a projecting sign shall be a minimum of
8 feet from grade and the height of the projecting sign
shall not exceed 12 feet where the sign projects over a
pedestrian walkway.
[3]
The projecting sign must be secured and located so as to
preclude it from becoming a hazard to the public.
[4]
Each business establishment may only have one projecting
sign on a facade.
[5]
Any sign projecting over Town property must have
adequate public liability insurance coverage. Proof of such
insurance must be provided to the Building Commissioner
prior to the granting of a permit for such sign.
[6]
(b)
Roof signs.
The maximum size of a roof sign shall not exceed 20
square feet.
[1]
[2] A roof sign shall be no higher than 1/5 of its length.
The roof sign shall be located above the eave, and shall not
project below the eave, or above a point located 2/3 of the
distance from the eave to the ridge.
[3]
(c)
Freestanding signs.
One freestanding sign is allowed on each lot where the
building is set back a minimum of five feet from the
property line.
[1]
[2] The sign may be double-faced.
(d)
(4)
§ 240-65.1 WASTEWATER DISCHARGE § 240-65.1
232:521
The maximum size and height of freestanding signs shall
be as follows:
For properties that contain one business
establishment, a freestanding sign shall not exceed
four square feet in area and seven feet in height.
[a]
For properties that contain two or more business
establishments, a freestanding sign shall not exceed
eight square feet in area and 10 feet in height.
[b]
For properties that are located in the portion of the
BA District south of Osterville-West Barnstable Road
and north of Pond Street, a freestanding sign shall not
exceed 20 square feet in area and 12 feet in height.
[c]
[3]
When a lot is located on two or more public ways, the
Building Commissioner may allow a second freestanding
sign, provided the second freestanding sign also conforms
to the requirements of Subsection A(4)(d)[3] above.
[4]
Awning signs.
Signage may be displayed on a maximum of two awnings
per facade per business establishment.
[1]
For the purposes of this section, two awnings with signage
on the same facade shall constitute one sign.
[2]
When a business establishment elects to put signage on
two awnings on the same facade pursuant to Subsection
A(4)(e)[2] above, that business establishment shall be
limited to one of the following additional signs:
[a] One wall sign, not to exceed six square feet in area; or
One projecting sign, subject to the requirements of
Subsection A(4)(b); or
[b]
One freestanding sign, subject to the requirements of
Subsection A(4)(d).
[c]
[3]
Lettering on an awning sign shall not exceed six inches in
height.
[4]
Any logo, symbol, graphic, or image incorporated into an
awning sign shall not exceed two square feet.
[5]
(e)
Special permit for dimensional relief. Within the BA Zoning
District, the Special Permit Grant Authority (SPGA) may provide
relief subject to the provisions of § 240-125C herein, from the size
and dimensional requirements of § 240-65.1A. The grant of any
special permit for dimensional relief within the BA District shall
require the SPGA to make the following findings:
(5)
§ 240-65.1 BARNSTABLE CODE § 240-65.1
232:522
There are unique features affecting the property or structure
containing the business establishment that make it distinctly
different in character from other development in the district.
Such features may include, but are not limited to, the visibility
of a structure or primary customer entrance from a public way,
the size of the structure containing the business establishment,
orientation of the structure on the lot, access to the structure,
or the number of tenants located on a single lot.
(a)
The proposed sign is consistent with the visual character of
surrounding neighborhood and the community.
(b)
Identification signs. Identification signs shall not count toward the total
number of signs allowed for a business establishment in § 240-65.1A.
Identification signs for secondary customer entrances.
Each business establishment with a second customer entrance
on a second facade oriented to a public way, parking lot, or
publicly used walkway is allowed one identification sign.
(a)
The area of the sign shall not exceed 5% of the area of the
building facade associated with the business establishment
that contains the establishment's secondary customer entrance
or 20 square feet, whichever is the lesser amount.
(b)
The identification sign shall be limited to either a wall sign,
projecting sign, or awning sign, subject to the requirements set
forth in § 240-65.1A(4) above.
(c)
The sign shall be attached to the building facade containing the
second customer entrance.
(d)
In instances where the multiple business establishments share
a secondary customer entrance, identification signs shall be
subject to the requirements of § 240-65.1A(3), except that size
limitations of Subsection B(1)(c) above shall apply.
(e)
(1)
Identification signs for delivery or service entrances.
Each business establishment is allowed one identification sign
attached to a building facade oriented to a public way, parking
lot, or publicly used walkway, providing that such facade has
a delivery or service entrance serving that business
establishment.
(a)
The identification sign shall be a wall sign located near the
delivery or service entrance.
(b)
The maximum size of an identification sign shall not exceed
two square feet.
(c)
(2)
B.
§ 240-65.1 WASTEWATER DISCHARGE § 240-65.1
232:523
Trade signs and temporary signs. These signs shall be permitted in
addition to the signs permitted in Subsections A and B above. All trade
signs and temporary signs shall be made of high-quality materials and
kept clean and properly maintained so as to avoid peeling, rusting or
other forms of decay.
Menu signs.
Each restaurant or food-service establishment may have one
menu sign not to exceed three square feet.
(a)
(b) The menu sign shall be attached to the building.
(1)
A-frame menu boards.
A-frame menu boards are permitted for restaurants and other
food service establishments.
(a)
(b) One A-frame menu board sign per establishment is permitted.
The maximum size of the A-frame menu board shall not exceed
two feet by three feet. The sign may be double-sided.
(c)
The sign must be A-frame style, and the frame must be made
out of solid wrought-iron and may incorporate a chalkboard.
(d)
Where the A-frame menu board is proposed on private
property, proof shall be submitted demonstrating to the
satisfaction of the Building Commissioner that explicit written
permission has been given by the owner of the property
proposed for locating the A-frame menu board.
(e)
Where the A-frame menu board is proposed on Town property,
the following additional criteria shall be met:
Proof of receipt of a license from the Town Manager or
designee for the sign at the proposed location.
[1]
Proof of insurance consistent with this license from the
Town Manager or designee shall be provided to the
Building Commissioner prior to placing any approved sign.
[2]
(f)
A-frame menu boards may not be used in conjunction with
trade figure/symbols, open/closed signs or menu signs.
(g)
A-frame menu boards must comply with the following
performance standards:
Shall be secured as necessary so as not to create nuisance
or hazard to pedestrians, motorists or business patrons
under any conditions.
[1]
Shall not obstruct safe passage or impede accessibility on
the sidewalk.
[2]
(h)
(2)
C.
§ 240-65.1 BARNSTABLE CODE § 240-65.1
232:524
Shall not obstruct views to another business or business
sign.
[3]
Shall be professionally made and well maintained. Handlettered
signs shall not incorporate informal, irregular
hand lettering.
[4]
[5] Shall not be illuminated.
Shall not have lights, banners, flags or similar objects
placed on or adjacent to the sign.
[6]
Shall be placed on the sidewalk leading to the public
business entrance.
[7]
[8] Shall be removed at the close of business each day.
[9] Shall not be displayed outside of business hours.
Trade figure or symbols.
One trade figure or symbol per business establishment is
permitted.
(a)
The trade figure or symbol shall represent the business and/
or its services and shall be based on historic trade
representations.
(b)
Trade figures or symbols shall comply with the following
requirements:
The trade figure or symbol shall be placed at the public
entrance immediately abutting the building front or affixed
to the front facade of the building in which the business
is located. Trade figures or symbols may also be
incorporated into a freestanding sign.
[1]
The maximum size of any trade figure or symbol shall be
three cubic feet.
[2]
The trade figure or symbol shall be secured as necessary
so that it does not create nuisance or hazard under any
conditions to pedestrians, motorists or business patrons.
[3]
The trade figure or symbol shall not obstruct safe passage
or impede accessibility on the sidewalk and shall not
obstruct views to another business or business sign.
[4]
Trade figures or symbols may not be used in conjunction
with A-frame menu boards.
[5]
(c)
Proof shall be submitted demonstrating to the satisfaction of
the Building Commissioner that explicit written permission has
(d)
(3)
§ 240-65.1 WASTEWATER DISCHARGE § 240-65.1
232:525
been given by the owner of the property proposed for locating
the trade figure or symbol.
Where the trade figure or symbol is proposed on Town
property, the following additional criteria shall be met:
Proof of receipt of a license from the Town Manager or
designee for the sign at the proposed location.
[1]
Proof of insurance consistent with this license from the
Town Manager or designee shall be provided to the
Building Commissioner prior to placing any approved
trade figure or symbol.
[2]
(e)
Open/closed signs.
Each business establishment is allowed one open/closed sign
on each building facade oriented to a street or parking lot,
providing that such facade has a customer entrance serving
that business establishment.
(a)
The open/closed sign shall either be attached at the customer
entrance, in a display window or door of the building in which
the business is located or attached to a freestanding sign.
Open/closed signs may also be incorporated into a trade figure
or A-frame menu board.
(b)
The maximum size of an open/closed sign shall not exceed 22
inches by 14 inches.
(c)
(4)
Incidental business signs.
Incidental business signs indicating the business, hours of
operation, credit cards accepted, and business affiliations shall
be permitted so long as the total area of all signs does not
exceed one square foot.
(a)
"Sale" signs and other temporary signs shall be permitted so
long as the total area of all such signs does not exceed three
square feet.
(b)
(5)
(6) Trade flags. Trade flags are prohibited in the BA District.
Illumination, design and materials.
(1) No neon or LED signs are permitted in the BA District.
(2) Internally illuminated signs are prohibited in the BA District.
The lettering, shape, and color employed in a sign shall be
compatible with the form, color, and materials of the building
housing the business establishment that the sign is identifying.
Signs for different businesses within the same building or for
(3)
D.
§ 240-65.1 BARNSTABLE CODE § 240-65.1
232:526
§ 240-66. Signs in industrial districts.
The provisions of § 240-65 herein shall apply, except that the total square
footage of all signs, while normally not to exceed 100 square feet, may be
allowed up to 200 square feet if the Building Commissioner finds that larger
signs are necessary for the site and are within the scale of the building
and are otherwise compatible with the area and in compliance with the
provisions and intent of these regulations.
§ 240-67. Signs in CVD, OM, HG, TD, VB-A, WBVBD and MMV
Districts. [Amended 6-1-2006 by Order No. 2006-136; 7-16-2009 by
Order No. 2009-137; 6-17-2010 by Order No. 2010-122; 9-8-2011 by
Order No. 2011-138]
The provisions of § 240-65 herein shall apply except that:
§ 240-68. Signs in MB-A1, MB-A2, MB-B and HD Districts.
[Amended 7-14-2005 by Order No. 2005-100]
The provisions of § 240-65 herein shall apply except that:
§ 240-69. Gasoline station signs.
multiple business establishments in multiple buildings on the same
property shall be of harmonious style and design.
Wall signs, projecting signs, roof signs, and freestanding signs shall
be made primarily of wood, PVC composite, medium-density or
high-density overlay plywood or HDPE sign board.
(4)
The maximum allowable height of all signs is eight feet, except that the
Building Commissioner may allow up to 12 feet if he finds that such
height is necessary for the site and is compatible with the appearance,
scale and character of the area.
A.
The maximum square footage of all signs shall be 50 square feet or 10%
of the building face, whichever is less.
B.
The maximum size of any freestanding sign shall be 10 square feet,
except that the Building Commissioner may grant up to 24 square feet
if he finds that the size is necessary for the site and that the larger size
is in scale with the building and does not detract from the visual quality
or character of the area.
C.
A. The maximum allowable height of signs shall not exceed eight feet.
B. Freestanding signs shall not exceed 24 square feet in area.
C. The total square footage of all signs shall not exceed 50 square feet.
In addition to the two allowable signs as specified in § 240-65 herein
each gas pump may have signage not to exceed 12 inches by eight
A.
§ 240-65.1 WASTEWATER DISCHARGE § 240-69
232:527
§ 240-70. Shopping center signs.
Each business in a shopping center is allowed one attached building sign
and one portion of a common freestanding sign. If the shopping center has
two or more public entrances which are at least 500 feet apart, a second
freestanding sign may be permitted if the Building Commissioner finds that
an additional sign is necessary, will not represent a visual hazard, and will
not detract from the visual quality or character of the area.
§ 240-71. Signs HVB District. [Amended 11-15-2001 by Order No.
2002-029; 7-14-2005 by Order No. 2005-100]
The provisions of § 240-65 herein shall apply except that:
inches indicating the name or type of gasoline and its price and other
information as may be required by federal, state or Town regulation.
Each gas station or garage may divide the one allowable attached wall
sign into no more than four separate signs affixed to and parallel to the
wall indicating the separate operations or departments of the business,
provided that the total area of the separate signs shall not exceed
maximum permitted areas specified in § 240-65 herein.
B.
If the business is an approved inspection station, it may additionally
have a sign indicating that fact as part of its permitted building or
freestanding sign, except that the total square footage of all signs must
not exceed the maximum permitted in § 240-65 herein.
C.
Temporary or portable signs of any and every type are specifically
prohibited.
D.
The maximum allowable height of all signs on buildings shall be 12 feet,
and the maximum height of a freestanding sign shall be eight feet.
A.
The maximum square footage of all signs shall be 50 square feet or 10%
of the building face, whichever is less.
B.
C. The maximum size of any freestanding sign shall be 12 square feet.
Temporary street banners may be permitted in the HVB Business
District only, for the purpose of informing the general public of
community events and activities, with approval of the Town Manager.
Street banners shall be hung in prescribed locations, securely fastened
to buildings, maintain a minimum height of 16 feet above the street, be
constructed of durable materials, used solely for community events in
the district, and remain in place for no more than three weeks prior to
the event and be removed within one week after the event.
D.
Open/closed sign, business trade figure or symbol, or location hardship
sign: Subject to § 240-85, Permit required; identification stickers.
[Added 6-17-2010 by Order No. 2010-123; amended 5-5-2011 by
Order No. 2011-047]
E.
§ 240-69 BARNSTABLE CODE § 240-71
232:528
Open/closed sign. A business may display a sign to identify and/
or direct patrons to their business, provided that the following
standards are met:
The open/closed sign is attached, at the public entrance, in a
display window or door of the building in which the business is
located.
(a)
Only one open/closed sign per business establishment is
permitted per frontage.
(b)
An open/closed sign may not be used in conjunction with a
trade flag or business trade figure or symbol.
(c)
The dimensions of any open/closed sign shall not exceed 22
inches by 14 inches.
(d)
(1)
Trade figure or symbol. A business may use a three dimensional
representation of their business, providing that the following
criteria are met:
The business trade figure or symbol is placed at the public
entrance immediately abutting the building front or is affixed
to the front facade of the building in which the business is
located. Such figures or symbols shall not be located on Town
property.
(a)
The business trade figure or symbol represents the business
and/or its services and is based on historic trade
representations.
(b)
Only one business trade figure or symbol per business
establishment is permitted.
(c)
A business trade figure or symbol may not be used in
conjunction with an open/closed sign or a trade flag.
(d)
The dimensions of any business trade figure or symbol shall not
exceed two feet by three feet by four feet.
(e)
The business trade figure or symbol shall be secured as
necessary so that it does not create nuisance or hazard under
any conditions to pedestrians, motorists or business patrons.
(f)
The business trade figure or symbol shall not obstruct safe
passage or impeded accessibility on the sidewalk and shall not
obstruct views to another business or business sign.
(g)
Proof shall be submitted demonstrating to the satisfaction of
the Building Commissioner that explicit written permission has
been given by the owner of the property proposed for locating
the trade figure or symbol.
(h)
(2)
§ 240-71 WASTEWATER DISCHARGE § 240-71
232:529
Location hardship sign. These signs are allowed in the HVB
District, provided that a special permit is obtained from the
Planning Board subject to the provisions of § 240-125C herein and
subject to the following criteria and performance standards.
Criteria.
Applications for location hardship signs shall demonstrate
through visual evidence substantial obstruction or other
substantial location hardship as defined herein.
[1]
One location hardship sign is permitted per each business
frontage.
[2]
Evidence demonstrating to the satisfaction of the Planning
Board and the Building Commissioner that explicit written
permission has been given by the owner(s) of the property
proposed for placing the sign that is the subject of the
special permit application.
[3]
Where the location hardship sign is within the Hyannis
Main Street and Waterfront Historic District a certificate
of appropriateness shall be obtained prior to and
submitted with the application for special permit.
[4]
Where the location hardship sign is proposed on Town
property, the following additional criteria shall be met:
Proof of receipt of a license from the Town Manager
or designee for the sign at the proposed location.
[a]
Proof of insurance consistent with this license from
the Town Manager or designee shall be provided to
the Planning Board and the Building Commissioner
prior to placing any approved sign.
[b]
[5]
(a)
Performance standards.
Location hardship signs:
[a] Shall not exceed two feet by four feet.
Shall be secured as necessary so as not to create
nuisance or hazard to pedestrians, motorists or
business patrons under any conditions.
[b]
Shall not obstruct safe passage or impede accessibility
on the sidewalk.
[c]
Shall not obstruct views to another business or
business sign.
[d]
[1]
(b)
(3)
§ 240-71 BARNSTABLE CODE § 240-71
232:530
§ 240-72. Trade flags.70 [Added 5-5-2011 by Order No. 2011-047]
Trade flags may be displayed by a business use located in a nonresidential
zoning district or trade flags may be displayed by a preexisting
nonconforming business use along the portion of Phinneys Lane from
Attucks Lane to Kidd's Hill Road and along Route 6A from Sandwich/
Barnstable line to the Barnstable/Yarmouth line. Trade flags are subject to
§ 240-85 and to the following:
§ 240-73. Construction signs.
Shall be professionally made, professionally painted
and well maintained. Hand-lettered signs shall not
incorporate informal, irregular hand lettering.
[e]
[f] Shall not be illuminated.
Shall not have lights, banners, flags or similar objects
placed on or adjacent to the sign.
[g]
Shall be placed on the sidewalk leading to the public
business entrance.
[h]
[i] Shall be removed at the close of business each day.
[j] Shall not be displayed outside of business hours.
Trade flags shall not be displayed in conjunction with location hardship
signs, open/closed signs, or trade figure or symbol.
A.
B. Trade flags are not counted towards the amount of signage allowed.
Trade flags shall be attached at the primary public entrance, to the
facade of the building in which the business is located.
C.
One trade flag per business establishment is permitted. For structures
with common entrances leading to multiple business establishments,
only one trade flag is allowed per common entrance.
D.
The dimensions of any trade flag shall not exceed three feet by five
feet.71
E.
When a building permit has been issued for the construction, alteration
or repair of a structure, and all other required permits have been
obtained, contractors or architects shall display a sign on the site while
approved work is going on.
A.
No contractor or architect shall display more than one sign on any
building at any given time.
B.
70.Editor's Note: Former § 240-72, Signs in B-1, O-1, O-2, and O-3 Districts, as amended, was
repealed 7-14-2005 by Order No. 2005-100.
71.Editor's Note: Former Subsection F, regarding trade flags in the BA District, which
immediately followed this subsection, was repealed 6-20-2013 by Order No. 2013-133.
§ 240-71 WASTEWATER DISCHARGE § 240-73
232:531
§ 240-74. Temporary signs.
Temporary signs and special sale signs may be permitted in all districts
subject to the following requirements:
No sign shall be larger than 24 square feet in area, nor more than five
feet tall.
C.
The total area of all construction signs displayed at a site at any given
time shall not exceed 24 square feet.
D.
The total area of all temporary signs allowed in this section shall not
exceed 20% of the glass area of the window in which the sign is placed.
A.
Special event and/or temporary signs, flags or banners belonging to
a not-for-profit organization, civic organization or church: [Added
5-7-2009 by Order No. 2009-074]
Prior to installation, shall be registered with and approved by the
Building Commissioner for a specific property owned or leased to a
not-for-profit, civic organization or church.
(1)
Shall be displayed only during permitted hours of operation and
shall be removed once operations cease each day.
(2)
Shall not obstruct pedestrian and/or vehicular traffic or be
otherwise considered, at the discretion of the Building
Commissioner or public safety officials, to be a public safety risk.
(3)
(4) Shall not exceed four feet in width and five feet in length.
Shall remain subject to approvals of all applicable historic boards
or commissions.
(5)
B.
Real estate signs. [Added 5-5-2011 by Order No. 2011-046]
Open house signs:
Shall only be placed for display 60 minutes before and shall be
removed within 60 minutes after the open house event.
(a)
Shall not obstruct pedestrian and/or vehicular traffic or be
otherwise considered, at the discretion of the Building
Commissioner or public safety officials, to be a public safety
risk.
(b)
Shall not be placed in any area that obstructs or otherwise
intrudes into areas containing memorials or monuments. Open
house signs are prohibited on a traffic island where such
memorials or monuments are located.
(c)
(1)
(2) Open house directional signs:
C.
§ 240-73 BARNSTABLE CODE § 240-74
232:532
§ 240-75. Directional or safety signs.
In addition to other allowable signs, directional, warning or traffic signs
necessary for the safety and direction of residents, employees, customers
and visitors may be allowed as follows:
Shall only be placed for display 60 minutes before and shall be
removed within 60 minutes after the open house event.
(a)
Shall only be displayed to assist motorists in finding an open
house that is concurrently displaying an open house sign.
(b)
Shall not obstruct pedestrian and/or vehicular traffic or be
otherwise considered, at the discretion of the Building
Commissioner or public safety officials, to be a public safety
risk.
(c)
Shall not be placed in any area that obstructs or otherwise
intrudes into areas containing memorials or monuments. Open
house signs are prohibited on a traffic island where such
memorials or monuments are located.
(d)
Subdivision off-premises directional signs:
Shall be displayed only during period of time when developed
or undeveloped lots in the subdivision are offered for initial
sale by the developer and shall be removed once such initial
sales are complete.
(a)
In accordance with § 240-85, prior to installation, shall be
permitted by the Building Commissioner for the specific
subdivision. Evidence of ownership, lease or other
arrangement allowing installation and display at the proposed
location shall be provided to the Building Commissioner with
the sign permit application.
(b)
Shall not obstruct pedestrian and/or vehicular traffic or be
otherwise considered, at the discretion of the Building
Commissioner or public safety officials, to be a public safety
risk.
(c)
Shall be located within reasonable proximity to the boundary
of the subdivision.
(d)
(e) Shall not exceed three feet by five feet.
Shall remain subject to approvals of all applicable historic
boards or commissions.
(f)
(3)
Such signs shall not exceed one square foot in area, nor be more than
three feet high.
A.
B. No more than four such signs will be allowed per site.
§ 240-74 WASTEWATER DISCHARGE § 240-75
232:533
§ 240-76. Business area signs.
Business area signs may, at the discretion of the Building Commissioner, be
permitted off-premises in remote areas, provided that the owner of record
of the land on which the sign is placed has given written permission and
that such signs shall be no more than eight square feet in area and shall
identify the business area only, and not individual businesses.
§ 240-77. Movie houses and places of entertainment.
§ 240-78. Illumination. [Amended 11-15-2001 by Order No.
2002-029]
The Building Commissioner may grant exceptions from the provisions
of this subsection on a case-by-case basis if he finds that the site
requires more or larger or higher directional or safety signs, and that
such signs will not conflict with the visual quality and character of the
area nor lead to clutter or confusion.
C.
Movie houses and places of entertainment may use one of their signs
as a display sign indicating movie titles, their ratings, the time(s) of
showing, or in the case of places of entertainment, the names of current
and/or next-appearing performers so long as they meet all dimensional
requirements.
A.
When a movie house or place of entertainment is one of two or more
businesses on a single lot, the Building Commissioner may allow two
freestanding signs, one of which may be a display sign, so long as the
total area of both signs combined does not exceed the maximum square
footage allowed in § 240-65 herein.
B.
Illuminated signs will normally not exceed fifty-foot lamberts (or
equivalent measurement) of intensity. Additional intensity may be
permitted by the Building Commissioner if it is determined that
additional intensity is necessary and that it will not detract from the
visual quality or character of the area. [Amended 7-14-2005 by
Order No. 2005-100]
Internally illuminated signs shall not be permitted in the Hyannis
Village Zoning Districts.
(1)
A.
The light from any sign shall be so shaded, shielded or directed or shall
be maintained at a sufficiently low level of intensity and brightness so
that it shall not adversely affect neighboring premises or the safe vision
of operators of vehicles moving on public roads and highways.
B.
All illuminated signs shall be so shaded, shielded or directed that they
will not reflect or shine on or into residential structures to an extent
that would constitute a nuisance or a disruption of the residential
character of the area.
C.
§ 240-75 BARNSTABLE CODE § 240-79
232:534
§ 240-79. Signs in Old King's Highway Historic District.
§ 240-80. Relocating or changing signs.
§ 240-81. Transfer of permits prohibited.
Permits cannot be transferred, and the new owner of a business for which
there are permitted signs must request a permit for those signs, which shall
be granted if all signs are found to be in compliance with these regulations.
§ 240-82. Protection of subsequent purchasers.
Any vendor or lessor who sells or leases any real property which includes a
nonconforming sign or signs has a duty to disclose to his vendee or lessee
the time remaining in the amortization or transition period applicable to the
sign or signs in question.
§ 240-83. Illegal signs.
§ 240-84. Abandoned signs.
The dimensional requirements of these regulations shall apply to all
portions of the Town.
A.
Within the boundaries of the Old King's Highway Historic District, the
Historic District's Regional Committee shall exercise the duties of the
Building Commissioner for the purposes of these regulations, except
that the Building Commissioner shall be informed of all actions taken
by the Regional Committee.
B.
The Building Commissioner and the Chairman of Regional Committee
shall consult with each other frequently regarding the administration
of these regulations, and shall work together to establish common sign
and architectural standards whenever possible.
C.
Any sign that is moved to another location, either on the same or other
premises shall require a permit.
A.
Any change in the width, length, height, color, wording, materials,
illumination or clearance between the bottom of the sign and the
ground, other than authorized in the permit, will require a new permit
prior to making any such changes.
B.
Order to remove. Following the procedures described in these
regulations for abandoned signs, the Building Commissioner can
establish an order of removal for illegal signs which may then be
removed by the Building Commissioner following due procedures of
law, with costs assessed to the permit holder or property owner.
A.
New signs at sites of illegal signs. No sign permit shall be granted for
a new sign to be located on a building or on a lot where one or more
illegal signs exist.
B.
§ 240-79 WASTEWATER DISCHARGE § 240-84
232:535
§ 240-85. Permit required; identification stickers.
§ 240-86. Violations and penalties.
Signs which have been abandoned due to a closing of a business, a
change in business name or for any other reason which renders the sign
not applicable to the property involved shall be removed by the permit
holder or the owner of the building or premises within 14 days from the
date of the action that caused the sign to be considered abandoned.
A.
A condition of approval for all sign permits shall be that permit holders
or owners of the building or premises shall, at his or her own expense,
remove all abandoned signs.
B.
New signs for a building or property on which an abandoned sign is
located shall not be approved until the abandoned sign is removed.
C.
The Building Commissioner shall determine when a sign is abandoned.
Notice shall be sent to the permit holder and to the property owner
prior to administrative action.
D.
All signs regulated by this chapter require a permit from the Building
Commissioner, with the exception of residential signs described in
§ 240-63A and B herein, so long as the house number has been
approved by the Engineering Department.
A.
Failure to obtain a permit shall make the sign illegal and subject to the
penalty provisions of § 240-86 herein.
B.
All signs regulated by this chapter shall be marked with an
identification sticker supplied by the Building Commissioner. Failure to
display this sticker as issued by the Town shall constitute a violation of
these regulations and be subject to the provisions of § 240-86 herein.
C.
The Building Commissioner may issue citations for violations of these
regulations.
A.
A failure to respond to properly issued citations or the issuance of three
or more citations for a sign shall be construed as a major violation
subject to a fine of not more than $100. Each day that such violation
continues shall constitute a separate offense.
B.
Continued violation, even with payment of penalties, for a period of 60
days, shall be grounds for removal of the sign(s) in question, following
the procedures for illegal signs.
C.
Applicants for signs who have previously had penalties for illegal signs
may be required to post a deposit of not more than $500 per sign
for new permits. The Building Commissioner shall review the sign one
year from the issuance of a permit and either issue a certificate of
compliance, release the deposit, or order necessary corrective action
D.
§ 240-84 BARNSTABLE CODE § 240-86
232:536
§ 240-87. Safety and maintenance.
§ 240-88. Appeals.
Any individual aggrieved by a decision of the Building Commissioner may
appeal to the Barnstable Board of Appeals, as provided under Chapter 40A
of the General Laws.
§ 240-89. Enforcement. [Amended 10-17-2002]
utilizing the deposited funds, with any remaining funds and a full
accounting of monies spent returned to the applicant.
All signs, together with their supporting structures, must be kept
properly maintained, repaired, and in proper condition. All signs and
the grounds about them shall be kept free from all rubbish and other
objectionable material.
A.
B. Failure to comply with these provisions shall be grounds for a citation.
If the Building Commissioner finds that a sign is unsafe or otherwise
improperly maintained, he shall issue a written notice to that effect to
the permit holder and the property owner. If the specified conditions
are not corrected, the Building Commissioner is authorized to remove
or repair the sign, all costs of which shall be assessed to the permit
holder or property owner, including an administrative fee of $50. If
public safety is involved, the Building Commissioner may take
immediate action.
C.
The provisions of these regulations shall be enforced by the Building
Commissioner.
A.
Citations, as specified in § 240-85 may be issued by the Building
Commissioner.
B.
§ 240-86 WASTEWATER DISCHARGE § 240-89
232:537

ARTICLE VIII
Nonconformities
[Amended 11-7-1987 by Art. 8; 11-2-1995 by Order No. 95-198]
§ 240-90. Intent.
It is the intent of this section to protect property rights of owners of
preexisting legally created nonconforming lots, uses and buildings or
structures and to provide regulation of changes or expansion of preexisting
nonconforming structures, building and uses.
§ 240-91. Nonconforming lot.
Separate lot exemption. Any increase in area, frontage, width, yard or
depth requirement of this chapter shall not apply to a lot for singleor
two-family residential use which at the time of recording or
endorsement:
(1) Was not held in common ownership with any adjoining land; and
Had a minimum of 5,000 square feet of area and 50 feet of frontage
or the minimum frontage requirement for the zoning district in
which it is located; and
(2)
(3) Conformed to the existing zoning if any when legally created; and
Was separately owned at the time of every zoning change which
made it nonconforming.
(4)
A.
Common lot protection.
Any increase in the area, frontage, width, yard or depth
requirement of this chapter shall not apply for a period of five years
from the effective date of the change, to a lot for single- or twofamily
residential use that:
Is held in common ownership with not more than two adjoining
lots; and
(a)
Had a minimum of 7,500 square feet in area and 75 feet of
frontage or the minimum frontage requirement for the zoning
district in which it is located; and
(b)
Was recorded or endorsed on a plan that conformed to zoning
when legally created; and
(c)
Conformed to applicable zoning requirements as of January 1,
1976.
(d)
(1)
B.
The protection afforded by Subsection B shall become vested upon the
sale or transfer of the lot so protected into ownership separate from
that of adjoining lots or the building thereon of a residence. [Amended
1-20-2005 by Order No. 2005-039]
C.
§ 240-90 WASTEWATER DISCHARGE § 240-91
232:539
Approval-not-required plan protection. Any change in uses permitted
under this chapter shall not apply to any lot created by a plan endorsed
by the Planning Board as a plan not requiring approval under the
Subdivision Control Law for such period of three years from the date of
endorsement, as provided by MGL Ch. 40A, § 6.
D.
Subdivision plan protection. Any change in this chapter shall not apply
to land shown on a plan under the Subdivision Control Law by a duly
submitted and endorsed definitive subdivision plan, or a preliminary
plan followed within seven months by a definitive plan, for such period
of eight years from the date of endorsement, as provided by MGL Ch.
40A, § 6. Any legally created lot with a recorded release from covenant
of the Planning Board that has been sold or transferred into separate
ownership and control from any adjoining lots within eight years from
the endorsement of the original subdivision plan shall be exempt from
any dimensional or bulk zoning changes and shall not lose its status as
a single buildable lot under zoning.
E.
Merged lots. Except as otherwise provided herein, lawfully
nonconforming lots that are adjoining and held in common ownership,
or under the control of the same owner, shall be treated so as to
conform so far as possible with the minimum area requirement of the
zoning district in which they are located. No lot so merged, or portion
thereof, may be changed or transferred in any manner that will increase
the degree of nonconformity unless a special permit has first been
obtained from the Zoning Board of Appeals. No such special permit may
create any additional buildable lot(s).
F.
Resource Protection Overlay District. [Amended 10-26-2000]
Any increase in area, frontage, width, yard or depth requirements
of the Resource Protection Overlay District shall not apply to a lot
for single- or two-family residential use which immediately prior to
November 16, 2000, either:
Conformed to the applicable bulk requirements of this chapter
immediately prior to November 16, 2000: or
(a)
Immediately prior to (on the effective date of this chapter,)
was protected from the applicable bulk requirements of this
subsection by the provisions of § 240-91A, B, C, D, or E of this
chapter.
(b)
(1)
(2) This protection afforded by this subsection shall be permanent.
G.
Developed lot protection; demolition and rebuilding on nonconforming
lots. Preexisting legal nonconforming lots which have been improved by
the construction of a single- or two-family residence which conformed
to all provisions of the zoning ordinance or bylaw at the time of
construction shall be entitled to completely demolish the old residence
and construct thereon a new residence in accordance with the
following. [Added 11-18-2004 by Order No. 2005-02572]
H.
§ 240-91 BARNSTABLE CODE § 240-91
232:540
As-of-right. The proposed demolition and rebuilding shall be
permitted as-of-right on a preexisting legal nonconforming lot that
contains a minimum of 10,000 square feet of contiguous upland,
provided that the Building Commissioner determines that all of the
following criteria are met:
The proposed new structure conforms to all current use and
setback requirements of the zoning district it is located in;
(a)
The proposed construction conforms to the following
requirements of lot coverage, floor area ratio and building
height:
Lot coverage by all buildings and all structures shall not
exceed 20% or the existing lot coverage, whichever is
greater;
[1]
The floor area ratio shall not exceed 0.30 or the existing
floor area ratio of the structure being demolished and
rebuilt, whichever is greater; and
[2]
The building height, in feet, shall not exceed 30 feet to the
highest plate and shall contain no more than 2 1/2 stories.
The building height, in feet, shall be defined as the vertical
distance from the average grade plane to plate.
[3]
(b)
Further expansion of the rebuilt structure must conform to
Subsection H(1)(b) above.
(c)
(1)
As of right: merged lots each containing a minimum area of 43,560
square feet of contiguous upland. Where, immediately prior to
November 16, 2000, two legally created contiguous lots each
containing a minimum area of 43,560 square feet of contiguous
upland were: (a) located in the Resource Protection Overlay
District and (b) held in common ownership and (c) improved by the
construction of one single-family residence, including accessory
structures which occupied both lots, each said 43,560 square foot
lot may be treated under these provisions as two separate buildable
lots, provided that each of said lots conformed to all the bulk
regulations of the zoning ordinance immediately prior to November
16, 2000, and as long as the other requirements of § 240-91H(1)(a)
through (c) above are satisfied. [Added 5-7-2009 by Order No.
2009-099]
(2)
By special permit. If the proposed demolition and rebuilding cannot
satisfy the criteria established in Subsection H(1) above, then the
Zoning Board of Appeals may allow the demolition and rebuilding
by special permit, provided that the Board finds that:
(3)
72.Editor's Note: This order also redesignated former Subsection H(2) as Subsection H(3).
§ 240-91 WASTEWATER DISCHARGE § 240-91
232:541
§ 240-92. Nonconforming buildings or structures used as singleand
two-family residences.
A preexisting nonconforming building or structure that is used as a singleor
two-family residence may be physically altered or expanded only as
follows:
§ 240-93. Nonconforming buildings or structures not used as
single- or two-family dwellings.
If the proposed new dwelling does not comply with Subsection
H(1)(a) above, then the proposed yard setbacks must be equal
to or greater than the yard setbacks of the existing building;
and [Amended 2-17-2005 by Order No. 2005-058]
(a)
All the criteria in Subsection H(1)(b)[1], [2] and [3] above are
met.
(b)
The proposed new dwelling would not be substantially more
detrimental to the neighborhood than the existing dwelling.
(c)
This section shall only apply to Subsection H(2) to the extent
that the proposed demolition and rebuilding cannot satisfy
the criteria established in Subsection H(1) above and shall
not be available for relief from any of the other provisions of
Subsection H(2). [Added 5-7-2009 by Order No. 2009-099]
(d)
As of right. If the Building Commissioner finds that:
The proposed physical alteration or expansion does not in any way
encroach into the setbacks in effect at the time of construction,
provided that encroachments into a ten-foot rear or side yard
setback and twenty-foot front yard setback shall be deemed to
create an intensification requiring a special permit under
Subsection B below; and
(1)
The proposed alteration or expansion conforms to the current
height limitations of this chapter.
(2)
A.
By special permit. If the proposed alteration or expansion cannot satisfy
the criteria established in Subsection A above, the Zoning Board of
Appeals may allow the expansion by special permit, provided that the
proposed alteration or expansion will not be substantially more
detrimental to the neighborhood than the existing building or structure.
B.
As of right.
The normal and customary repair and maintenance of a preexisting
nonconforming building or structure not used as a single or twofamily
dwelling is permitted as of right.
(1)
The alteration and expansion of a preexisting nonconforming
building or structure, housing a conforming use, is permitted as of
(2)
A.
§ 240-91 BARNSTABLE CODE § 240-93
232:542
§ 240-94. Nonconforming use. [Amended 3-11-1999 by Order No.
99-056]
A preexisting nonconforming use shall be limited in the extent it may
expand or intensify. A preexisting nonconforming use may be changed to a
principal permitted use as of right. A preexisting nonconforming use may
be changed to a conditional use by special permit as provided for within the
zoning district in which it is located, or to another nonconforming use as
provided for herein.
right, provided that the alteration or expansion does not increase
or intensify the degree of the preexisting nonconformity of the
building or structure, and that the alteration or expansion conforms
in all other respects with all applicable requirements of this
chapter.
By special permit. Alterations or expansions in a preexisting
nonconforming building or structure that do not meet the provisions
of Subsection A shall be permitted only by a special permit from the
Zoning Board of Appeals. In granting such special permit, the Board
must find that the proposed repairs, alterations and/or expansion are
not substantially more detrimental to the surrounding neighborhood. If
the building or structure houses a nonconforming use, the provisions of
§ 240-94 shall also apply.
B.
Change of a nonconforming use to another nonconforming use. A
preexisting nonconforming use may be changed to another
nonconforming use only by special permit from the Zoning Board of
Appeals. In granting a special permit for the change of a nonconforming
use, the Board must find that the proposed nonconforming use is no
more detrimental to the neighborhood and that all of the following
requirements are met:
The applicant has received all necessary approvals from the Board
of Health.
(1)
The proposed nonconforming use:
(a) Requires no more parking than the previous use;
Does not generate more traffic than the previous use, as
measured by the Institute of Transportation Engineers Trip
Generation Handbook or other sources acceptable to the
Zoning Board of Appeals, nor does it cause Town expenditures
to address traffic mitigation measures;
(b)
Does not result in an increase of on-site and off-site noise, dust,
and odors;
(c)
Does not result in an increase in the hours of operation or in
the number of tenants or employees;
(d)
(2)
A.
§ 240-93 WASTEWATER DISCHARGE § 240-94
232:543
Does not expand the gross floor area of the nonconforming use,
except as may be provided in § 240-93B, nor does it increase
the number of nonconforming uses on a site;
(e)
Is on the same lot as occupied by the nonconforming use on the
date it became nonconforming; and
(f)
Is not expanded beyond the zoning district in existence on the
date it became nonconforming.
(g)
Expansion of a preexisting nonconforming use. A preexisting
nonconforming use shall not be expanded and/or intensified except
by special permit from the Zoning Board of Appeals. In granting a
special permit for expansion of a preexisting nonconforming use, the
Board must find that the proposed expansion, and/or intensification will
not be more detrimental to the neighborhood and that the following
requirements are met:
Any proposed expansion of the use shall conform to the established
setbacks for the zoning district in which it is located, or such
greater setbacks as the Zoning Board of Appeals may require due
to the nature of the use and its impact on the neighborhood and
surrounding properties.
(1)
The proposed use and expansion is on the same lot as occupied by
the nonconforming use on the date it became nonconforming.
(2)
The proposed new use is not expanded beyond the zoning district
in existence on the date it became nonconforming.
(3)
At the discretion of the Zoning Board of Appeals, improvements
may be required in order to reduce the impact on the neighborhood
and surrounding properties including but not limited to the
following:
Greater conformance of signage to the requirements of Article
VII;
(a)
(b) The addition of off-street parking and loading facilities;
Improved pedestrian safety, traffic circulation and reduction in
the number and/or width of curb cuts;
(c)
Increase of open space or vegetated buffers and screening
along adjoining lots and roadways. The applicant shall
demonstrate maximum possible compliance with § 240-53,
Landscape Requirements for Parking Lots, Subsection F, if
applicable.
(d)
Accessory uses or structures to the principal nonconforming
use may be required to be brought into substantial
conformance with the present zoning.
(e)
(4)
B.
§ 240-94 BARNSTABLE CODE § 240-95
232:544
§ 240-95. Reestablishment of damaged or destroyed nonconforming
use, building or structure.
§ 240-96. Variance situations.
Situations which exist pursuant to the duly authorized grant of a variance
from the terms of this chapter as provided for in § 240-125B(3) and (5) shall
not constitute nonconformities for the purposes of this chapter.
§ 240-97. Abandonment; nonuse.
Any lawful preexisting nonconforming use or building or structure or use
of land which has been abandoned or not used for three years shall not
thereafter be reestablished. This section shall not apply in cases of damage
or destruction governed by § 240-95.
The reestablishment of a lawful preexisting nonconforming use and/or
building or structure which has been destroyed or damaged by fire, acts
of nature or other catastrophe shall be permitted as of right, provided
that the Building Commissioner has determined that all the following
conditions are met:
The reconstruction or repair will not increase the gross floor area
or height of the building or structure beyond that which previously
existed, nor increase the footprint of the structure;
(1)
If the building's location on the lot is to be changed, it will change
in a manner that will result in greater compliance with the bulk
regulations established in the zoning district in which it is located;
and
(2)
The reconstruction or repair will not constitute an expansion or
intensification of any nonconforming use.
(3)
In the case of any use in which it would otherwise be required, the
site plan review process has been followed.
(4)
A.
The preexisting nonconforming use and/or structure or building shall
be discontinued unless a building permit has been applied for within
two years from the date of damage or destruction, and construction is
continuously pursued to completion.
B.
§ 240-95 WASTEWATER DISCHARGE § 240-97
232:545

ARTICLE IX
Site Plan Review
[Added 11-7-1987 by Art. 1]
§ 240-98. Findings.
Developments designed to be used for business and professional offices,
commercial establishments, industrial facilities, medical-service facilities,
public recreational facilities and multiple-family dwellings, together with
their associated outdoor areas for vehicular movement and parking, invite
and accommodate varying degrees of open and continuous use by the
general public. Owing to their physical characteristic and the nature of
their operations, such developments may affect neighboring properties and
adjacent sidewalks and streets. It is in the interest of the community to
promote functional and aesthetic design, construction and maintenance of
such developments and to minimize any harmful effects on surrounding
areas.
§ 240-99. Purposes.
The provisions of this article are designed to assure that all development
activities regulated by this article will be carried out so as to provide for
and maintain:
§ 240-100. Scope of application.
The provisions of this article shall apply to:
Protection of neighboring properties against harmful effects of uses on
the development site;
A.
Convenient and safe access for fire-fighting and emergency rescue
vehicles within the development site and in relation to adjacent streets;
B.
Convenience and safety of vehicular and pedestrian movement within
the development site and in relation to adjacent streets, properties or
improvements;
C.
Satisfactory methods for drainage of surface water to and from the
development site;
D.
Satisfactory methods for storage, handling and disposal of sewage,
refuse and other wastes resulting from the normal operations of the
establishment(s) on the development site;
E.
Convenience and safety of off-street loading and unloading of vehicles,
goods, products, materials and equipment incidental to the normal
operation of the establishment(s) on the development site; and
F.
Harmonious relationship to the terrain and to existing buildings in the
vicinity of the development site.
G.
§ 240-98 WASTEWATER DISCHARGE § 240-100
232:547
§ 240-101. Site plan approval required.
§ 240-102. Contents of site plan.
Any construction, demolition, grading, clearing or other land
development activity, except for improvements made as shown on a
definitive subdivision plan approved by the Planning Board of the Town
of Barnstable and minimal clearing necessary to accomplish soil test
borings, percolation tests and similar site testing and investigation.
A.
Establishment of any new use or new construction of any building or
structure, including any grading or land development activity except
detached single-family and two-family dwellings and permitted
accessory structures thereto. [Amended 10-7-1993 by Order No.
94-015]
B.
Any alteration, expansion, reconstruction or modification to the existing
condition(s) of a structure or any change of use which would
necessitate the provision of additional off-street parking, additional lot
area or any other site alteration in order for such structure or use as so
changed to comply with all requirements of this chapter.
C.
The construction or creation of any new parking lot or the expansion or
redesign of any existing parking lot. [Amended 2-22-1996 by Order
No. 95-194]
D.
The erection of any freestanding sign, except not to include directional
signs.
E.
No building permit or occupancy permit shall be issued for any activity
or use within the scope of § 240-100 herein unless a site plan has been
approved therefor.
A.
No activity within the scope of § 240-100 herein shall be carried out
without an approved site plan therefor. Any work done in deviation from
an approved site plan shall be a violation of this chapter, unless such
deviation is approved in writing by the Building Commissioner as being
of no significant detriment to the achievement of any of the purposes
set forth in § 240-99 herein.
B.
The site plan shall include one or more appropriately scaled maps or
drawings of the property, drawn to an engineer's scale, clearly and
accurately indicating such elements of the following information as are
pertinent to the development activity proposed:
Legal description, Planning Board subdivision number (if
applicable), Assessors' Map and parcel number and address (if
applicable) of the property.
(1)
Name, address and phone number of the property owner and
applicant, if different than the property owner.
(2)
A.
§ 240-100 BARNSTABLE CODE § 240-102
232:548
Name, address, and phone number of the developer, contractor,
engineer, other design professional and agent or legal
representative.
(3)
Complete property dimensions, area and zoning classification of
property.
(4)
Existing and proposed topographical contours of the property
taken at two-foot contour intervals by a registered engineer or
registered land surveyor.
(5)
The nature, location and size of all significant existing natural land
features, including, but not limited to, tree, shrub, or brush masses,
all individual trees over 10 inches in caliper, grassed areas, large
surface rock in excess of six feet in diameter and soil features.
(6)
Location of all wetlands or water-bodies on the property and within
100 feet of the perimeter of the development activity.
(7)
The location, grade and dimensions of all present and/or proposed
streets, ways and easements and any other paved surfaces.
(8)
Engineering cross sections of proposed new curbs and pavements,
and vision triangles measured in feet from any proposed curb cut
along the street on which access is proposed.
(9)
Location, height, elevation, interior and exterior dimensions and
uses of all buildings or structures, both proposed and existing;
location, number and area of floors; number and type of dwelling
units; location of emergency exits, retaining walls, existing and
proposed signs.
(10)
Location of all existing and proposed utilities and storage facilities
including septic systems and any storage materials, truck loading
and parking areas, tanks, garbage dumpsters and recyclable
storage materials.
(11)
Proposed surface treatment of paved areas and the location and
design of drainage systems with drainage calculations prepared by
a registered civil engineer.
(12)
Complete parking and traffic circulation plan, if applicable,
showing location and dimensions of parking stalls, dividers,
bumper stops, required buffer areas and planting beds.
(13)
Lighting plan showing the location, direction and intensity of
existing and proposed external light fixtures.
(14)
A landscaping plan showing the location, name, number and size
of plant types, and the locations and elevation and/or height of
planting beds, fences, walls, steps and paths.
(15)
§ 240-102 WASTEWATER DISCHARGE § 240-102
232:549
§ 240-103. Site development standards. [Amended 11-15-2001 by
Order No. 2002-029]
A location map or other drawing at appropriate scale showing
the general location and relation of the property to surrounding
areas including, where relevant, the zoning and land use pattern
or adjacent properties, the existing street system in the area and
location of nearby public facilities.
(16)
Location within an Historical District and any other designation as
an historically significant property, and the age and type of each
existing building and structure on the site which is more than 50
years old.
(17)
Location of site with regard to the GP Groundwater Protection
Overlay District and WP Well Protection Overlay District as shown
on the Official Zoning Map, § 240-6A, Identification of Zoning Map.
[Amended 9-17-1998 by Order No. 99-012]
(18)
Location of site with regard to flood areas regulated by § 240-34
herein.
(19)
Location of site with regard to areas of critical environmental
concern as designated by the Commonwealth of Massachusetts,
Executive Office of Environmental Affairs.
(20)
Additional information may be required by the Building Commissioner
or his designee, as reasonably necessary, to make determinations
required by this article.
B.
A reasonable effort shall be made to conserve and protect natural
features that are of some lasting benefit to the site, its environs and the
community at large.
A.
Slopes which exceed 10% shall be protected by appropriate measures
against erosion, runoff, and unstable soil, trees and rocks. Measures
shall be taken to stabilize the land surface from unnecessary disruption.
Such stabilization measures shall be the responsibility of the property
owner.
B.
The placement of buildings, structures, fences, lighting and fixtures on
each site shall not interfere with traffic circulation, safety, appropriate
use and enjoyment of adjacent properties.
C.
At any driveway, a visibility triangle shall be provided in which nothing
shall be erected, placed, planted or allowed to grow so as to materially
impede vision from within motor vehicles between a height of three feet
and eight feet above the average center-line grades of the intersecting
street and driveway, said triangle being bounded by the intersection of
the street line and the edges of a driveway and a line joining points
along said lines 20 feet distant from their projected intersection.
D.
§ 240-102 BARNSTABLE CODE § 240-103
232:550
Adequate illumination shall be provided to parking lots and other areas
for vehicular and pedestrian circulation. In no case shall freestanding
illumination devices be installed to a height exceeding 15 feet in a
residential district. All illumination shall be directed and/or shielded so
as not to shine beyond the perimeter of the site or interfere with traffic.
E.
All areas designed for vehicular use shall be paved with a minimum
of either a three-inch bituminous asphalt concrete, a six-inch portland
cement concrete pavement, or other surface, such as brick, cobblestone
or gravel, as approved by the Town Engineer.
F.
All parking spaces shall be arranged and clearly marked in accordance
with the parking lot design standards contained in § 240-104 herein.
Signs and pavement markings shall be used as appropriate to control
approved traffic patterns.
G.
All utility service transmission systems, including but not limited to
electrical, telephone, cable and other communication lines, shall,
whenever practicable, be placed underground or moved behind
buildings.
H.
All surface water runoff from structures and impervious surfaces shall
be disposed of on site, but in no case shall surface water drainage be
across sidewalks or public or private ways. In no case, shall surface
water runoff be drained directly into wetlands or water bodies.
Drainage systems shall be designed to minimize the discharge of
pollutants by providing appropriately designed vegetated drainage
channels and sedimentation basins that allow for adequate settling of
suspended solids and maximum infiltration. Dry wells, leaching pits
and other similar drainage structures may be used only where other
methods are not practicable. All such drainage structures shall be
preceded by oil, grease and sediment traps to facilitate removal of
contaminants. All calculations shall be for a twenty-year storm and shall
be reviewed by the Town Engineer.
I.
In addition to the provisions of this section, all other applicable
requirements of this chapter shall be complied with.
J.
Storage areas. Exposed storage areas, machinery, garbage dumpsters,
recyclable storage, service areas, truck loading areas, utility buildings
and structures shall be screened from view of abutting properties and
streets using planting, fences and other methods compatible with this
chapter. Garbage dumpsters shall be located in designated areas, and
where feasible, shared with other uses.
K.
Craigville Beach District implementing regulation: additional site
development standards. [Adopted 1-19-2011 by Ord. No. 11-01 of
the Barnstable County Assembly of Delegates pursuant to Ch.
716 of the Acts of 1989 (Cape Cod Commission Act)]
Stormwater management. Within the Craigville Beach District, for
nonresidential uses including nonresidential parking lots, all new
(1)
L.
§ 240-103 WASTEWATER DISCHARGE § 240-103
232:551
§ 240-104. Minimum parking lot design standards.
(Editor's Note: See drawings at the end of this chapter.)
§ 240-105. Required procedures for site plan review.
development, expansions, modifications, alterations and changes
in use shall obtain the approval of the Building Commissioner
for a stormwater management plan that meets the following
requirements:
Stormwater management and erosion controls shall use best
management practices, low-impact designs and other adaptive
management practices that at a minimum accommodate the
twenty-four-hour, twenty-five-year storm event and, to the
maximum extent feasible, conform to the Massachusetts
Stormwater Management Standards adopted pursuant to 310
CMR 10.05(6)(k), Policy, and guidelines as set forth in the
Massachusetts Stormwater Handbook; and
(a)
A long-term operation, inspection and maintenance plan that
ensures stormwater management systems will function as
designed.
(b)
Planting and vegetation management. Within the Craigville Beach
District, for nonresidential uses including nonresidential parking
lots, all new development, expansions, modifications, alterations
and changes in use shall obtain the approval of the Building
Commissioner for a planting and vegetation management plan that
incorporates the use of native and drought-resistant plantings that
minimize the need for irrigation and the use of pesticides and
chemical fertilizers. Drip irrigation should be used as an alternative
to spray irrigation for establishing plantings and maintaining
plantings under extreme drought conditions.
(2)
At least six copies are required of all site plan sheets, drawings and
written information. Submissions shall be delivered to the Building
Department.
A.
Within five working days of receiving a site plan, the Building
Commissioner or his designee shall distribute copies of the site plan
to the Department of Planning and Development, the Department of
Public Works and the Board of Health.
B.
Upon receipt of a site plan from the Building Commissioner or his
designee, the agencies as noted in Subsection B shall respond in
writing, by notations on the site plan, or both, as to the propriety of the
proposed development, within the context of each agency's jurisdiction.
Such response shall be made to the Building Commissioner or his
designee within 10 working days of each agency's receipt of the site
plan.
C.
§ 240-103 BARNSTABLE CODE § 240-105
232:552
The Building Commissioner or his designee may solicit the advice of
any other Town agency or department he deems necessary to properly
make the determinations required by this article.
D.
Site plans shall be reviewed for consistency with zoning and other
applicable regulations and standards, and within 20 working days of
receiving a site plan, the Building Commissioner or his designee, shall
notify the applicant of any approval, conditional approval or
disapproval, stating reasons.
E.
One copy of the approved site plan shall be provided each to the
applicant, the Department of Planning and Development, the
Department of Public Works and the Board of Health. One copy of
the approved site plan shall remain in the records of the Building
Department.
F.
Upon completion of all work, a letter of certification, made upon
knowledge and belief according to professional standards, shall be
submitted to the Building Commissioner or his designee by a registered
engineer or registered land surveyor, as appropriate to the work
involved, that all work has been done substantially in compliance with
the approved site plan, except that the Building Commissioner or his
designee may certify compliance.
G.
§ 240-105 WASTEWATER DISCHARGE § 240-105
232:553

ARTICLE X
Personal Wireless Communication
[Added 6-3-1999 by Order No. 99-074A]
§ 240-106. Purpose and intent.
It is the intent of this article to provide for the location and siting of
wireless service communication facilities and their accessory structures in
accordance with the Telecommunications Act of 1996, to provide for the
orderly provision of facilities; ensure public safety; and to minimize adverse
visual impacts upon both residential and nonresidential areas.
§ 240-107. Requirements for all personal wireless facilities in all
zoning districts.
§ 240-108. Antennas permitted by special permit in all zoning
districts. [Amended 8-1-2013 by Order No. 2013-126]
Except where permitted as of right in § 240-109 below, in all zoning
districts, an antenna mounted or located on any existing building, structure
or communications tower may be permitted by special permit from the
Zoning Board of Appeals, provided that no antenna exceeds the height
of the existing structure by more than 12 feet, unless the Board finds
that additional height is necessary to provide coverage, and the additional
height will not be visually intrusive upon the surrounding area.
Installation and construction of all personal wireless service facilities,
including but not limited to antennas, mounts, equipment shelters and
structures, shall be subject to Article IX Site Plan Review, and shall
require issuance of a building permit.
A.
The applicant shall provide site plan review with evidence that they
are a licensed carrier, authorized by the Federal Communications
Commission (FCC) to construct and operate personal wireless services,
and that the proposed transmitters are FCC regulated and approved.
B.
The structure to which any mount or antenna is attached is a legally
built structure under zoning, or a preexisting, legal nonconforming
structure.
C.
If the location is within a designated historic district, the applicant shall
secure a certificate of appropriateness, to the extent required.
D.
Structural components including guy wire anchors and equipment
shelters shall comply with all required setbacks of the zoning district.
E.
Any equipment or base receiver station, not located within an existing
building or underground vault, shall be designed to fit in with
traditional Cape Cod architecture styles and materials, or shall be
screened from view.
F.
§ 240-106 WASTEWATER DISCHARGE § 240-109
232:555
§ 240-109. Antennas permitted as of right in all zoning districts.
[Amended 8-1-2013 by Order No. 2013-126]
Antennas permitted as of right in all zoning districts shall be as follows:
Co-location of antennas and customary appurtenant equipment on an
existing communications tower lawfully permitted for the purpose of
supporting FCC-licensed antennas, subject to compliance with
§ 240-107 and the following standards:
The antenna shall not increase the height of the communications
tower.
(1)
The antenna shall not extend out from the tower more than
technically necessary for proper operation.
(2)
The applicant shall submit a structural analysis, prepared and
stamped by a registered professional engineer licensed to practice
in the Commonwealth of Massachusetts, demonstrating that the
communications tower has sufficient structural capacity for the
installation. The analysis shall include information about all
antenna installations on the tower.
(3)
Ground-mounted accessory equipment shall be located within an
existing equipment shelter or an area fully screened in accordance
with § 240-107F.
(4)
A.
An antenna and/or tower used in accordance with the terms of an
amateur radio service license issued by the Federal Communications
Commission provided that any facility tower is not licensed or used for
any commercial use, subject to all the requirements of § 240-8, Exempt
uses.
B.
Television and radio antennas, including satellite dishes not exceeding
a diameter of four feet, for personal use, accessory to a residential use,
or to provide entertainment for a single business such as a restaurant.
C.
An antenna completely enclosed within an existing structure other than
a communications tower, provided that the associated equipment or
base transceiver station is located within an underground vault, or
within an existing building or addition thereto, other than an equipment
or base receiver shelter.
D.
An antenna located upon the roof of an existing building or structure
other than a communications tower, provided that the antenna does not
exceed a height of 12 feet, and provided that the equipment shelter
is set back from the roof edge a distance equal to the height of the
equipment shelter
E.
An antenna located on a water tower belonging to a public water supply
utility, by permission of the water utility, not to exceed the height of
the water tower by more than 12 feet, except that the Zoning Board of
Appeals may by special permit increase the height of the antenna up to
F.
§ 240-109 BARNSTABLE CODE § 240-109
232:556
20 feet where the location of the water tower and design of the antenna
is such that it will not be visually intrusive upon the surrounding area.
Antennas located on existing utility stanchions, not to exceed a height
of 12 feet above the utility stanchions, located within a Commonwealth
Electric Company easement, with permission of the landowner to
location and maintenance of an equipment or base receiver station
shelter, or submission of recorded easement language demonstrating
the right to install an equipment or base receiver station for a wireless
communication facility.
G.
§ 240-109 WASTEWATER DISCHARGE § 240-109
232:557

ARTICLE XI
Growth Management
[Added 7-19-2001 by Order No. 2001-11873]
§ 240-110. Authority.
This article is adopted under the authority of the Home Rule Amendment,
Article 89 of the Constitution of the Commonwealth, the Cape Cod
Commission Act, Chapter 716 of the Acts of 1989, as amended, MGL Ch.
40A, Ch. 41 §§ 81L through 81GG, and Ch. 111.
§ 240-111. Purposes.
The purpose of this article is to ensure that a harmonious pattern and
predictable rate of development occurs in Barnstable, which protects
the health, safety and welfare of current and future Barnstable
residents. The consequences of the historical and current patterns and
rates of development in Barnstable such as our historic inability to fund
our capital needs and the further degradation of our environmental
assets are described in the Local Comprehensive Plan. The rate of
residential development in Barnstable is determined by and should not
exceed the ability of the Town to provide adequate infrastructure and to
protect the natural environment. In addition, this development rate is
intended to further the legitimate commonwealth and local interests in
the provision of a fair share of housing that is affordable to persons with
both low and moderate incomes. This development rate will also guard
against potential increases in the growth rate, which could adversely
affect the Town's environmental resources, economy and land values.
A.
This article establishes a development rate adequate to ensure that the
Town, with prudent reliance on local and other financial sources and in
compliance with the revenue generating guidelines of Proposition 2 1/
2, can and will provide infrastructure and operate in a manner which
provides current and future Barnstable residents with an adequate and
responsible level of Town services, as defined by relevant, commonly
accepted professional standards. This article also establishes a
development rate adequate to ensure that the Town has the ability to
implement its affordable housing goals, as set forth in the Barnstable
Local Comprehensive Plan as updated by the Barnstable Affordable
Housing Plan dated January 31, 2001.74
B.
It is anticipated by this article that during the time until buildout
occurs, the Town will strive to upgrade its infrastructure to keep pace
C.
73.Note: The following Growth Management Ordinance is a DCPC (District of Critical
Planning Concern) implementing regulation. The DCPC was approved by the Barnstable
Assembly of Delegates on September 5, 2001; and the Cape Cod Commission gave its final
approval on September 20, 2001. The Commission also approved this ordinance (originally
approved by the Barnstable Town Council on July 19, 2001) as the implementing
regulation on September 20, 2001. This implementing ordinance became a part of the
Zoning Ordinance on September 21, 2001.
74.Editor's Note: See Ch. 9, Affordable Housing.
§ 240-110 WASTEWATER DISCHARGE § 240-111
232:559
§ 240-112. Definitions.
For the purposes of this Article X only, the following terms shall have the
following meanings:
AFFORDABLE DWELLING UNIT — A residential dwelling unit:
AFFORDABLE PERMIT — A building permit to construct an affordable
dwelling unit.
BUILDING PERMIT — A permit to construct an affordable or market rate
residential dwelling unit, issued pursuant to the State Building Code, state
law and local ordinances and regulations. When a single structure is
proposed to accommodate three or more residential dwelling units, the
issuance of the first building permit shall authorize construction of the
entire structure; however, only three dwelling units shall receive a
certificate of occupancy per building permit issued.
CERTIFICATE OF AFFORDABILITY — A certificate issued by the Barnstable
Office of Community Development authorizing an applicant to apply for a
building permit to construct an affordable dwelling unit. A certificate shall
issue for all units that meet the requirements of the DHCD to be counted as
affordable in the state count toward the affordable goal.
CALENDAR YEAR — January 1 through December 31 of a given year.
DATE OF FILING — The date of the Building Department's date and time
stamp on a fully completed application to construct a new residential
dwelling unit.
MARKET PERMIT — A building permit to construct a market-rate
residential dwelling unit.
PERSON — An individual, corporation, business trust, estate, trust,
partnership, association, joint venture, two or more persons having a joint
or common interest, or any legal entity.
RESIDENTIAL DWELLING UNIT — A single unit providing complete
independent living facilities for one or more persons including permanent
with its total population, as outlined in the Capital Improvements Plan
and consistent with the growth rate established by this article. This
includes the preparation of a long-term capital plan and a commitment
to make contributions, as practical, to infrastructure and to the
established Capital Trust Fund as appropriate to fund infrastructure,
promote affordable housing and protect the environment.
Subject to a valid Chapter 40B comprehensive permit and meeting
the requirements of the Commonwealth's Department of Housing and
Community Development (the "DHCD") to be counted as affordable in
the state count toward the 10% goal, as that goal may be amended by
the General Court (the "affordable goal"); or
A.
Otherwise meeting the affordability requirements of the DHCD as
evidenced by receipt of a certificate of affordability, as defined below.
B.
§ 240-111 BARNSTABLE CODE § 240-112
232:560
provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation. The term
"residential dwelling unit" shall not include family apartments, group homes
and congregate facilities, hotels, motels, and other uses that are not
considered residential for purposes of zoning, as determined by the Town
Attorney.[Amended 2-28-2008 by Order No. 2008-089]
SUBSTANTIAL FINANCIAL INTEREST — A one-percent or greater legal
or equitable interest. A person is deemed to have a substantial financial
interest in an application for a building permit in which that person has a
current, or had within the last 12 months a one-percent or greater legal
or equitable interest in the real property that is the subject of the building
permit application.
TOWN MANAGER — The Town Manager or his designee(s).
§ 240-113. Effective date and applicability.
§ 240-114. Rate of residential development.
Effective date. The provisions of this article shall take effect upon the
termination of the limited moratorium establishing a lottery system for
the issuance of building permits, as established through the District of
Critical Planning Concern nomination under the provisions of Sections
10 and 11 of the Cape Cod Commission Act.
A.
Applicability. This article applies to all new residential construction,
including new structures and expansions, changes or alterations of
existing structures that result in an increase in residential dwelling
units, as that term is defined in § 240-112 above. It is intended that
the cap established by this article shall apply to both market-rate
units and affordable units. The development of additional dwelling units
protected by MGL, Ch. 40A, § 6 shall be subject to the delays imposed
by this growth management article; provided, however, this article is
not intended to diminish the ability ultimately to construct a dwelling
unit.
B.
Affordable growth rate. Subject to adjustments provided in this Article
XI, the Building Commissioner shall issue building permits for
construction of additional affordable dwelling units only if the
aggregate of permits issued therefor will not result in authorizing
construction, within each consecutive calendar year, of greater than
36 additional affordable dwelling units (the "annual affordable
distribution"). In the event the Building Commissioner is required
pursuant to a Chapter 40B comprehensive permit to issue affordable
permit(s) in excess of the annual affordable distribution, or the Town
Manager authorizes issuance of affordable permit(s) pursuant to a
certificate of affordability in excess of the annual affordable
distribution, future annual affordable distribution(s) shall be decreased
by the same number, as necessary. In the event the Building
Commissioner does not issue all of the affordable permits made
available through an annual affordable distribution, as adjusted, the
A.
§ 240-112 WASTEWATER DISCHARGE § 240-114
232:561
next calendar year annual affordable distribution shall be increased by
the amount of remaining affordable permits.
Market growth rate.
Subject to adjustments provided in this Article XI, the Building
Commissioner shall issue building permits for construction of
additional market rate residential dwelling units only if the
aggregate of permits issued therefor will not result in authorizing
construction, within each consecutive calendar year, of greater
than 96 market permits (the "annual market distribution"). In the
event the Building Commissioner is required to issue market
permit(s) in excess of the annual market distribution pursuant
to Subsection D, Adjustments, below, future annual market
distribution(s) shall be decreased by the same number, as
necessary.
(1)
In order to lessen the impact of this article at the time of its
adoption, this article:
Contains the following graduated scale for implementation of
the target growth rate:
Graduated Annual Market Distribution Schedule
Year Market Permits
2002 132
2003 126
2004 108
2005 and forward 96 = target annual market distribution
(a)
(b) And provides a hardship exemption procedure (§ 240-117).
(2)
Transition year 2001. The following provisions shall remain in
effect from the effective date of this article through December 31,
2001:
The Building Commissioner shall issue building permits for
construction of additional market-rate and affordable
residential dwelling units only if the aggregate of permits
issued will not result in authorizing construction, within the
2001 calendar year, of greater than 183 building permits.
(a)
No person shall submit a building permit application within 10
days from the date of their last building permit application in
which they have a substantial financial interest, and no person
shall submit more than three building permit applications per
month in which they have a substantial financial interest. In a
given month, no person or entity shall receive more than three
building permits in which the person or entity has a substantial
financial interest.
(b)
(3)
B.
§ 240-114 BARNSTABLE CODE § 240-114
232:562
§ 240-115. Issuance of residential building permits.
During calendar year 2001 no person shall receive more than
30 building permits in which they have a substantial financial
interest. Any person issued 30 or more building permits in
calendar year 2001 permits in which they have a substantial
financial interest shall, upon receipt of the 30th building
permit, immediately withdraw all pending building permit
application(s); said withdrawn application(s) may be
resubmitted consistent with the terms of the preceding
subsection.
(c)
Chapter 40B permits. It is the intention of the Town to phase the
development of all residential dwelling units constructed under the
provisions of Chapter 40B. Within Chapter 40B comprehensive permit
developments, those units that are included in the DHCD tally of
affordable units counted toward the affordable goal, as determined by
the Town, shall apply for affordable permits. Those units that are not
included in the DHCD count toward the affordable goal, as determined
by the Town, shall apply for market permits.
C.
Adjustments. The following activities shall result in the adjustment of
annual affordable and market distributions, as the case may be:
Revocation and abandonment. Building permits issued on or after
July 1, 2000, but revoked or subsequently abandoned under the
provisions of the State Building Code shall be added to the next
annual distribution. Building permits issued pursuant to this article
shall be exercised in a continuous and expeditious manner.
Construction shall commence within six months of issuance of
a building permit; provided, however, that the Building
Commissioner shall grant one six-month extension upon request.
(1)
Single lot protection. A building permit to construct a market-rate
single-family dwelling unit on a lot in single ownership, to be owned
and occupied by the owner of that parcel of land, applied for but
not issued within 24 months from the date of filing shall be issued,
and future annual market distributions shall be decreased by the
same amount, if necessary.
(2)
Other required permits. Permits required to be issued under
Chapter 40B or by a final court or administrative order shall be
issued as required, and future annual affordable and/or market
distributions, as the case may be, shall be decreased by the same
amount, if necessary.
(3)
Borrowing against future distributions. In the event that no market
permits are available to be issued in a given month, the Building
Commissioner shall issue six market permits in that month and
shall decrease subsequent annual market distribution(s) by the
same number.
(4)
D.
§ 240-114 WASTEWATER DISCHARGE § 240-115
232:563
The Building Commissioner shall issue building permits for
construction of additional residential dwelling units only if permit
issuance complies with the requirements of this section.
Building permits shall be issued on a monthly basis. Prior to issuing
market permits within each month, the Building Commissioner
shall determine the number of market permits remaining available
within the annual market distribution and shall increase or
decrease the number of available market permits consistent with
any adjustments required by § 240-114D above. The Building
Commissioner shall then divide the number of available market
permits by the number of months remaining in the calendar year,
which shall be the number of market permits issued within that
month. Fractions shall be rounded down to the nearest whole
number and added to subsequent monthly calculations.
(1)
Prior to issuing affordable permits within each month, the Building
Commissioner shall determine the number of affordable permits
remaining available within the annual affordable distribution and
shall increase or decrease the number of available affordable
permits consistent with any adjustments required by § 240-114A
and D above. The Building Commissioner shall then divide the
number of available affordable permits by the number of months
remaining in the calendar year, which shall be the number of
affordable permits issued within that month. Fractions shall be
rounded down to the nearest whole number and added to
subsequent monthly calculations.
(2)
In the event that no affordable or market permits are available to
be issued in a given month, only those permits requiring issuance
or authorized for issuance pursuant to § 240-114A and D above
shall be issued until any adjustments result in additional available
permits or the next annual distribution becomes available.
(3)
A.
Limitations and transferability of building permits. The following
restrictions shall apply to the submission of building permit
applications and the issuance of building permits:
Within any calendar year, no person shall submit to the Building
Department more than 20 building permit applications in which
such application(s) that person has a substantial financial interest;
(1)
No person shall submit a building permit application within 10 days
from the date of their last building permit application in which
that person has a substantial financial interest, and no person shall
submit more than three building permit applications per month in
which that person has a substantial financial interest. In a given
month, no person or entity shall receive more than three building
permits in which the person or entity has a substantial financial
interest.
(2)
B.
§ 240-115 BARNSTABLE CODE § 240-115
232:564
§ 240-116. Exemptions.
The following uses shall be exempt from the residential building permit
limitations established by this article:
During any calendar year no person shall receive more than 20
building permits in which that person has a substantial financial
interest.
(3)
Any applicant authorized to receive a building permit under this
article may transfer said building permit to another lot owned by
the same applicant. This provision shall not be deemed to extend
the time period for exercising a building permit.
(4)
Application and issuance of affordable permits.
In order to be deemed complete, applications for affordable
permits shall include a valid certificate of affordability or shall
include a copy of a valid Chapter 40B comprehensive permit
providing that the unit constructed will meet the requirements of
the DHCD to be counted as affordable in the state count toward the
affordable goal.
(1)
Affordable permits shall be issued based upon the date of filing.
Applications filed prior in time shall be issued a building permit
prior to subsequently filed applications.
(2)
C.
Market permit issuance. Market permits shall be issued based upon the
date of filing. Applications filed prior in time shall be issued a building
permit prior to subsequently filed applications.
D.
A. Municipal uses;
Affordable housing dwelling units created pursuant to Chapter 9,
Affordable Housing, Article II, Accessory Apartments and Apartment
Units, of the Code of the Town of Barnstable;
B.
Senior continuing care retirement community units created under
§ 240-29 of the Code of the Town of Barnstable; [Added 2-28-2008 by
Order No. 2008-089]
C.
Multifamily dwellings (apartments) for active adult or assisted living
created under § 240-21A(9)(j) of the Code of the Town of Barnstable;
[Added 5-19-2016 by Order No. 2016-14675]
D.
E. Nonresidential development; and
Reconstruction, extension, alteration, modification, and upgrade of an
existing dwelling unit that does not result in the creation of a new
residential dwelling unit.
F.
75.Editor's Note: This order also provided for the redesignation of former Subsections D and
E as Subsections E and F, respectively.
§ 240-115 WASTEWATER DISCHARGE § 240-117
232:565
§ 240-117. Hardship procedure.
The Town Manager shall establish a procedure for holding hearings and
rendering decisions on whether to grant an exemption from the provisions
of this article, in whole or in part, to relieve a substantial hardship, financial
or otherwise.
§ 240-118. Determination of buildability.
The Town Manager shall establish a procedure for issuance of
determinations of buildability to establish the residential development
potential of a lot or lots. Such procedure shall include consultation with the
Planning Board if such lot or lots are included in an approved subdivision or
approval-not-required plan. Other boards and officials may be consulted to
determine potential limitations on development.
§ 240-119. Violations and penalties.
Any person who knowingly violates the provisions of this article shall be
prosecuted to the fullest extent of the law. Fraud and conspiracy in
connection herewith shall remain separate offenses.
§ 240-120. Review of provisions.
The Town Council shall review this article within one year of adoption and
every three years thereafter, and may review this article upon achieving
its goal of supplying 10% affordable housing, to determine whether
adjustments are necessary for the public health, safety or welfare.
§ 240-121. Scope and validity.
Nothing in this article shall nullify or exempt any property or use from any
other provisions of this chapter or other Town regulations. The invalidity of
any section or provision of this article shall not invalidate any other section
or provision hereof, nor shall it invalidate any building permit, occupancy
permit or special permit issued in reliance on said section or provision prior
to the determination of its invalidity.
§ 240-122. Severability.
If for any reason the proposed District of Critical Planning Concern
nomination under consideration by the Barnstable County government fails,
the provisions of this article shall become effective under the authority
of the Home Rule Amendment, Article 89 of the Constitution of the
Commonwealth, MGL Ch. 40A, and Ch. 41, §§ 81L through 81GG.
§ 240-117 BARNSTABLE CODE § 240-122
232:566
ARTICLE XII
Registered Recreational Marijuana Cultivators, Research Facilities
and Testing Laboratories
[Added 9-6-2018 by Order No. 2019-01576]
§ 240-122.1. Registered recreational marijuana cultivators,
research facilities and testing laboratories.
Purpose; applicability; use; prohibited marijuana establishments
Purpose. To provide for the location of registered recreational
marijuana cultivators, research facilities and independent testing
laboratories, as defined herein, in accordance with Chapter 55 of
the Acts of 2017 and M.G.L. c.94G, the Humanitarian Medical Use
of marijuana Act. M.G.L. c.94C, App. § 1-1, et. seq., as amended
by Chapter 55 of the Acts of 2017, M.G.L. c.94I, to be enacted
pursuant to Chapter 55 of the Acts of 2017, and Cannabis Control
Commission Regulations 935 CMR 500.00 governing Adult Use of
marijuana, in locations within the MS Medical Services District
and the GM Gateway Medical District suitable for lawful marijuana
cultivation, research and Independent Testing and to minimize
adverse impacts of marijuana cultivation, research facilities and
independent testing laboratories on adjacent properties,
residential neighborhoods, historic sites, schools and other
locations where minors congregate by regulating the siting, design,
placement, security, modification and removal of marijuana
cultivators, research facilities and independent testing
laboratories.
(1)
Applicability. The cultivation, processing, packaging, and transfer
of marijuana products; conducting of research regarding marijuana
products; and testing of marijuana or cannabis is prohibited unless
licensed by all applicable Massachusetts licensing authorities and
permitted under this article.
(2)
Use. Within the MS Medical Services District and GM Gateway
Medical District, a licensed marijuana cultivator, research facility
or independent testing laboratory may be permitted as a
conditional use, provided a special permit is first obtained from
the Planning Board. All special permits granted under this article
shall be subject to the provisions of § 240-125C and § 240-24.1.2E
herein and subject to all additional standards and conditions of this
article.
(3)
Prohibition of all other non-medical marijuana establishments.
Except for licensed marijuana cultivators, research facilities and
independent testing laboratories permitted as a conditional use
in the MS Medical Services District and GM Gateway Medical
District, subject to all the requirements of this article, all other
(4)
A.
76.This order also redesignated former Articles XII through XIV as Articles XII through XV.
§ 240-122.1 WASTEWATER DISCHARGE § 240-122.1
232:567
types of non-medical "marijuana establishments" as defined in
M.G.L. c.94G § 1, including marijuana product manufacturers,
marijuana retailers or any other types of licensed related
businesses are prohibited.
Definitions. Any term not specifically defined herein shall have the
meaning as defined in Massachusetts General Laws Chapter 94G, § 1,
and the Cannabis Control Commission Regulations 935 CMR 500.00
governing Adult Use of marijuana.
CANNABIS or MARIJUANA or MARIHUANA — All parts of any plant
of the genus Cannabis, not excepted in 935 CMR 500.002: Cannabis
or marijuana or Marihuana (a) through (c) and whether growing or
not; the seeds thereof; and resin extracted from any part of the plant;
clones of the plant; and every compound, manufacture, salt, derivative,
mixture or preparation of the plant, its seeds or resin including
tetrahydrocannabinol as defined in M.G.L. c.94G, § 1; provided that
cannabis shall not include:
CRAFT MARIJUANA COOPERATIVE — A marijuana cultivator
comprised of residents of the Commonwealth and organized as a
limited liability company, limited liability partnership, or cooperative
corporation under the laws of the Commonwealth. A cooperative is
licensed to cultivate, obtain, manufacture, process, package and brand
cannabis or marijuana products to transport marijuana to marijuana
establishments, but not to consumers.
RECREATIONAL MARIJUANA ESTABLISHMENT, INDEPENDENT
TESTING LABORATORY — A laboratory that is licensed by the
Cannabis Control Commission and is:
The mature stalks of the plant, fiber produced from the stalks, oil,
or cake made from the seeds of the plant, any other compound,
manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture or preparation of the mature
stalks, fiber, oil, or cake made from the seeds of the plant or the
sterilized seed of the plant that is incapable of germination;
(1)
(2) Hemp; or
The weight of any other ingredient combined with cannabis or
marijuana to prepare topical or oral administrations, food, drink or
other products.
(3)
Accredited to the International Organization for Standardization
17025 (ISO/IEC 17025:2017) by a third-party accrediting body
that is a signatory to the International Laboratory Accreditation
Accrediting Cooperation mutual recognition arrangement or that is
otherwise approved by the Cannabis Control Commission;
(1)
Independent financially from any medical marijuana treatment
center, marijuana establishment or licensee for which it conducts a
test; and
(2)
B.
§ 240-122.1 BARNSTABLE CODE § 240-122.1
232:568
RECREATIONAL MARIJUANA ESTABLISHMENT, MARIJUANA
CULTIVATOR — An entity licensed to cultivate, process and package
marijuana, and to transfer marijuana to other marijuana
establishments, but not to consumers. A craft marijuana cooperative is
a type of marijuana cultivator.
RECREATIONAL MARIJUANA ESTABLISHMENT, MARIJUANA
RESEARCH FACILITY — An entity licensed to engage in research
projects by the Cannabis Control Commission.
Qualified to test cannabis or marijuana in compliance with 935
CMR 500.160 and M.G.L. c. 94C, § 34.
(3)
Requirements for allowed marijuana cultivators, research facilities and
independent testing laboratories. Marijuana cultivators, research
facilities and independent testing laboratories shall comply with the
following requirements:
General.
Marijuana cultivators, research facilities and independent
testing laboratories shall comply with applicable state and
local laws, regulations, ordinances, codes, conditions and
agreements with the Town, including, but not limited to,
Chapter 55 of the Acts of 2017 and M.G.L. c.94G, the
Humanitarian Medical Use of marijuana Act, M.G.L. c.94C,
App. § 1-1, et seq., as amended by Chapter 55 of the Acts of
2017 and M.G.L. c.94I, to be enacted pursuant to Chapter 55
of the Acts of 2017, Cannabis Control Commission Regulations
935 CMR 500.00 governing Adult Use of marijuana, the Town
of Barnstable's General Ordinances, the Town of Barnstable's
Zoning Ordinances, all applicable Town building, fire
prevention, police, and health codes, regulations and
standards, any conditions imposed on licenses and permits
held by the marijuana cultivators, research facilities and
independent testing laboratories (including, but not limited to,
the Town's Planning Board special permit), and agreements
between the marijuana cultivator, research facility or
independent testing laboratory and the Town, including host
community agreements.
(a)
Marijuana cultivators, research facilities and independent
testing laboratories shall maintain all permits and licenses
required by state and local laws. Any voiding of the Cannabis
Control Commission's license by operation of law (including
due to cessation of operations, failure to become operational
within the permitted time, or relocation without Cannabis
Control Commission approval), and any revocation or
suspension of the marijuana cultivators,' research facilities'
and independent testing laboratories' Cannabis Control
Commission license shall result in an automatic suspension
of the special permit pending hearing or the opportunity
(b)
(1)
C.
§ 240-122.1 WASTEWATER DISCHARGE § 240-122.1
232:569
therefore afforded to the marijuana cultivator, research facility
or independent testing laboratory and pending further
determination by the Planning Board.
All taxes and charges owed to the Town must be paid on a
current basis. Failure to pay all taxes and charges shall be
subject to the provisions of Chapter 121 of the Barnstable Code
and all other available legal remedies.
(c)
An approved host community agreement shall be required
prior to granting a special permit for a marijuana cultivator,
research facility or independent testing laboratory.
(d)
Dimensional requirements. Except where it is explicitly stated
otherwise in this article, marijuana cultivator, research
facilities and independent testing laboratories shall conform to
the dimensional requirements applicable within the underlying
and other overlaying zoning districts.
(e)
Parking. The required number of parking spaces for marijuana
cultivators, research facilities and independent testing
laboratories shall be one space for every 700 square feet of
gross floor area. The Planning Board shall also rely on the
recommendation of site plan review.
(f)
Loading. The Planning Board may require loading bays based
on the recommendation of site plan review and/or based on the
needs of the proposed use.
(g)
Landscaping. Landscape requirements in the underlying
zoning district shall apply.
(h)
Landscape buffers. The landscape setback from any residential
property line shall be 20 feet. Landscape buffers shall be
densely landscaped with a combination grasses, tress, and
shrubs providing year-round screening.
(i)
Signage. The signage requirements of the underlying zoning
district pursuant to Article VII of this chapter shall apply. The
Planning Board may impose additional restrictions on signage,
as appropriate, to mitigate any aesthetic impacts.
(j)
Groundwater protection. Marijuana cultivators, research
facilities and independent testing laboratories shall be subject
to the requirements of § 240-35, Groundwater Protection
Overlay Districts, as applicable.
(k)
Operational requirements.
All marijuana cultivators', research facilities' and independent
testing laboratories' licensed operations shall be conducted
within a building at a fixed location.
(a)
(2)
§ 240-122.1 BARNSTABLE CODE § 240-122.1
232:570
No marijuana cultivators, research facilities or independent
testing laboratories shall allow research, testing, cultivation,
processing, packaging, manufacturing, or display of marijuana
or marijuana products to be visible to the public without the
use of binoculars, aircraft, or other optical aids.
(b)
Marijuana cultivators, research facilities and independent
testing laboratories may cultivate, process, package, or
conduct research and testing on marijuana or marijuana
products as licensed by the Cannabis Control Commission only
within an area that is enclosed and secured in a manner that
prevents access by persons not permitted by the marijuana
cultivator, research facility or independent testing laboratory
to access the area.
(c)
The hours of operation for a marijuana cultivator, research
facility or independent testing laboratory shall be those
conditioned by the marijuana cultivator's, research facility's or
independent testing laboratory's special permit.
(d)
Marijuana cultivators, research facilities and independent
testing laboratories shall ensure that their hours and methods
of transportation of product shall not be a detriment to the
surrounding area and nearby uses.
(e)
Marijuana cultivators, research facilities and independent
testing laboratories shall not permit any disorder, disturbance,
or illegality under state or local law of any kind on the
premises.
(f)
Marijuana cultivators', research facilities' and independent
testing laboratories' operations shall not result in illegal
redistribution under state or local law of marijuana obtained
from the marijuana cultivator, research facility or independent
testing laboratory, or in use of marijuana in any manner that
violates state or local law.
(g)
Marijuana cultivators, research facilities or independent
testing laboratories operations shall not create nuisance
conditions in parking areas, sidewalks, streets and areas
surrounding its premises and adjacent properties.
(h)
Marijuana cultivators, research facilities and independent
testing laboratories shall equip the premises and otherwise
conduct their operations in such a manner that (a) no
pesticides or other chemicals or products are dispersed into
the outside atmosphere, or into a wastewater treatment
system or in any other manner that may contaminate the
groundwater and (b) no odor of marijuana or its processing
can be detected by a person with an unimpaired and otherwise
normal sense of smell at the exterior of any adjoining use or
property.
(i)
§ 240-122.1 WASTEWATER DISCHARGE § 240-122.1
232:571
Marijuana cultivators, research facilities and independent
testing laboratories shall be required to remove all marijuana
and marijuana products by the earlier of: prior to surrendering
its state-issued license; or within six months of ceasing
operations.
(j)
Marijuana cultivators, research facilities and independent
testing laboratories must display a sign legible from the
exterior of the building in which the marijuana cultivator,
research facility or independent testing laboratory is located
either by posting on the building exterior in close proximity to
the entrance or by placement in a window in close proximity to
the entrance with the text facing and legible from the exterior,
which states: "Must be 21 years or older and show
identification to enter this establishment."
(k)
Solid and liquid waste, including waste composed of or
containing marijuana, finished marijuana, marijuana-infused
product, or byproducts of marijuana processing shall be
stored, secured, managed, and disposed of in accordance with
state law and all other applicable statutes and ordinances and
regulations of the Town.
(l)
Security-specific requirements.
Marijuana cultivators, research facilities and independent
testing laboratories shall submit and receive the approval of
the Barnstable Police Department for its required security and
emergency procedures, including a disaster plan, which plan
shall include measures relating to alarms, fencing, gates,
limited access areas, delivery procedures, police details,
specification of video and lighting locations, notifications to
the Police Department in the event of any known or suspected
violation of criminal law that has taken place on or near the
location of the establishment.
(a)
Lighting shall be designed and maintained so as to protect
adjacent properties from intrusive lighting; however, in
accordance with state law, the exterior perimeter of marijuana
cultivators, research facilities and independent testing
laboratories shall be sufficiently lit to facilitate surveillance.
(b)
Marijuana cultivators, research facilities and independent
testing laboratories shall secure every entrance so that access
to areas containing the storage of marijuana products are
restricted to employees and others permitted by the marijuana
cultivator, research facility or independent testing laboratory
to access the area and to Cannabis Control Commission or
state and local law enforcement officers, agents and
emergency personnel.
(c)
(3)
§ 240-122.1 BARNSTABLE CODE § 240-122.1
232:572
Marijuana cultivators, research facilities and independent
testing laboratories shall secure their inventory and equipment
during and after operating hours to deter and prevent theft of
marijuana, marijuana products and marijuana accessories.
(d)
Marijuana cultivators, research facilities and independent
testing laboratories shall file an emergency procedures,
including a disaster plan, with the Town's Fire, Police and
Health Departments and share with these Departments their
security plan and procedures and any updates to them in the
event they are modified.
(e)
Landscaping shall be in compliance with the requirements
set forth herein, except that in accordance with state law,
marijuana cultivators, research facilities and independent
testing laboratories shall maintain trees, bushes, and other
exterior vegetation so that they do not allow for a person or
persons to conceal themselves from sight.
(f)
Access to premises and information/reporting/record-keeping.
Marijuana cultivators, research facilities and independent
testing laboratories shall be subject to unannounced,
unscheduled, periodic inspections of its premises by the
Building Commissioner or designee, including an agent from
the Building, Health, Police and applicable Fire Department
on weekdays between 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. to determine
the marijuana cultivator's research facility's; or independent
testing laboratory's compliance with the requirements of
applicable state and local laws, regulations, codes, license and
permit conditions, and this article. In addition, routine
inspections may be made on weekdays during regular Town
business hours by authorized inspectional departments to
determine compliance with applicable state and local laws,
regulations, codes and license and permit conditions.
Inspections by the authorized inspectional departments may
be made at other times to investigate complaints or suspected
noncompliance issues. Inspections may include all areas
occupied, used or controlled by the marijuana cultivator,
research facility or independent testing laboratory. Facilities
requiring re-inspection are subject to applicable re-inspection
fees. Inspections shall be conducted in conformity with
applicable federal, state and local law.
(a)
Marijuana cultivators, research facilities and independent
testing laboratories shall cooperate and comply with requests
for information made by the Building Commissioner or
designee, including agents from the Planning and
Development, Building, Health, Police, Fire and Public Works
Departments.
(b)
(4)
§ 240-122.1 WASTEWATER DISCHARGE § 240-122.1
232:573
Within 24 hours of receipt of notice of it, marijuana cultivators,
research facilities and independent testing laboratories shall
file with the Town Manager, Director of Public Health and the
Building Commissioner any summary cease and desist order,
cease and desist order, quarantine order, suspension order,
revocation order, order limiting sales, deficiency statement,
plan of correction, notice of a hearing, notice of any other
administrative process or legal action, denial of a license,
denial of a renewal of a license, or final action issued by a state
or federal agency (including, but not limited to, the Cannabis
Control Commission) regarding the marijuana cultivator,
research facility or independent testing laboratory, or the
Cannabis Control Commission license.
(c)
Additional location requirements for marijuana cultivators,
research facilities and independent testing laboratories.
No marijuana cultivator, research facility and independent
testing laboratory shall be located within 500 feet, as
measured from each lot line of the subject lot, of the following
preexisting uses: K-12 educational use; childcare center; or
children's camp.
(a)
(5)
Site plan review for marijuana cultivators, research facilities and
independent testing laboratories. Marijuana cultivators, research
facilities and independent testing laboratories shall be subject to Article
IX, Site Plan Review, § 240-102.
D.
Special permits. The following apply to special permits to operate
a marijuana cultivator, research facility or independent testing
laboratory.
Application requirements: Applicants shall include with their
special permit application:
Copies of any required licenses and permits relating to the
operation of the marijuana cultivator, research facility or
independent testing laboratory, or, if an application for a
required license or permit is pending, a copy of the application.
(a)
Evidence of the applicant's right to use the proposed site as
a marijuana cultivator, research facility or independent testing
laboratory, such as a deed, lease or purchase and sales
agreement.
(b)
(c) A copy of the site plan review approval.
A description of the security measures, required by this article,
approved by Barnstable Police Department and Cannabis
Control Commission for the marijuana cultivator, research
facility or independent testing laboratory, as applicable.
(d)
(1)
E.
§ 240-122.1 BARNSTABLE CODE § 240-122.1
232:574
A copy of emergency procedures, including a disaster plan
with procedures to be followed in case of fire or other
emergencies, approved by the Cannabis Control Commission
for the marijuana cultivator, research facility or independent
testing laboratory, as applicable.
(e)
A copy of the policies and procedures for the transfer or
acquisition of marijuana between marijuana cultivators,
research facilities and independent testing laboratories and
other recreational marijuana establishments, as applicable.
(f)
(g) A copy of proposed waste disposal procedures.
Proof of liability insurance that is in accordance with 105 CMR
725.105(Q) or any applicable regulations promulgated by the
Cannabis Control Commission.
(h)
Any waivers from Cannabis Control Commission regulations
issued for the marijuana cultivator, research facility or
independent testing laboratory, as applicable.
(i)
(j) A copy of the community host agreement.
Any other materials requested by the special permit
application form, as well as any other additional materials
the Planning and Development Department determines is
necessary for review, such as Department reports or
transportation studies or a license application.
(k)
Special permit criteria, The Planning Board, subject to the
provisions of § 240-125C and § 240-24.1.2E. shall not approve any
application for a special permit unless it finds that in its judgment
all of the following conditions are met:
That the marijuana cultivator, research facility or independent
testing laboratory has demonstrated compliance with or the
ability to comply where the requirements are prospective with
all of the general requirements set forth in this article.
(a)
That the marijuana cultivator, research facility or independent
testing laboratory has an approved host agreement.
(b)
That the marijuana cultivator, research facility or independent
testing laboratory has security and emergency procedures,
including a disaster plan, approved by the Barnstable Police
Department.
(c)
(d) The location is compliant with this article in its entirety.
The site is designed such that it provides convenient, safe and
secure access and egress for clients and employees arriving
to and leaving from the site using all modes of transportation,
(e)
(2)
§ 240-122.1 WASTEWATER DISCHARGE § 240-122.1
232:575
including drivers, pedestrians, cyclists and public
transportation users.
Traffic generated by client trips, employee trips, and deliveries
to and from the marijuana cultivator, research facility or
independent testing laboratory shall not create a substantial
adverse impact on nearby residential uses.
(f)
A special permit granted under this article shall have a term
limited to the duration of the applicant's ownership or lease
of the premises for a marijuana cultivator, research facility or
independent testing laboratory, as licensed by the applicable
Massachusetts licensing authority. Any new license for an
existing marijuana cultivator, research facility or independent
testing laboratory location or transfer of an existing license to
a new owner shall require a new special permit pursuant to the
Barnstable Zoning Ordinance.
(g)
Implementation. This article shall not be implemented in a manner that
conflicts or interferes with the operation of M.G.L. c. 94G, 94I or the
regulations promulgated thereunder, including 935 CMR 500.
F.
Severability. The provisions of Article XII, § 240-122.1, are severable.
If any provision shall be held to be invalid or unconstitutional by any
court of competent jurisdiction, the remaining provisions shall continue
in full force and effect.
G.
§ 240-122.1 BARNSTABLE CODE § 240-122.1
232:576
ARTICLE XIII
Administration and Enforcement
§ 240-123. Enforcement; violations and penalties.
§ 240-124. Bonds and permits.
Enforcement. This chapter shall be enforced by the Building
Commissioner of the Town of Barnstable or his designee.
A.
Violations. For any violation of this chapter, the Building Commissioner
or his designee may, where the situation requires, cause a criminal
complaint to issue from the First District Court of Barnstable or may
institute proceedings in Superior Court to enjoin the construction,
alteration, enlargement, reconstruction or use of any building or the
use of any premises in violation hereof, or further may institute
proceedings to enjoin the construction, alteration, enlargement or
reconstruction of any building which would result in a use in violation
hereof.
B.
Nonconflicting remedies. The use of one of the remedies described in
Subsection B above shall not preclude the use of the other remedy for
the same violation or a continuing violation.
C.
Verification required. The Building Commissioner or his designee may
require any plans, documents or sworn statements to be filed with
his office to verify the intended use of a building or premises, or to
establish the existence, nature or extent of a nonconformity alleged to
exist or any other matter in which evidence is required.
D.
Penalties. Anyone convicted of a violation under this chapter shall be
fined not more than $300 for each offense. Each day that such violation
continues shall constitute a separate offense.
E.
Performance bonds required. A performance bond of not less than $4
per foot of frontage against possible costs due to erosion or damage
within passable street rights-of-way shall be required by the Building
Commissioner prior to authorization of any new building, and a bond
or cash security may be required by the Building Commissioner for
other construction, such bond or cash security to be held by the Town
Treasurer until an occupancy permit is granted as provided for in
Subsection B herein. Prior to the proceeding with construction above
the foundation, a registered land surveyor shall certify that the
structure has been located in compliance with all yard requirements.
A.
Occupancy permits. No premises and no building or structure erected,
altered or in any way changed as to construction or use, under a permit
or otherwise, shall be occupied or used without an occupancy permit
signed by the Building Commissioner. Such permit shall not be issued
until the premises, building or structure and its uses and accessory uses
comply in all respects with this chapter.
B.
§ 240-123 WASTEWATER DISCHARGE § 240-125
232:577
§ 240-125. Zoning Board of Appeals.
Establishment of the Board. The Zoning Board of Appeals established
by Chapter 215 of the Acts of 1984, as amended by Chapter 295 of the
Acts of 1984 and as may be further amended from time to time, is the
Zoning Board of Appeals referred to herein.
Membership of the Board. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall
consist of five members appointed by the Town Council of the Town
of Barnstable.
(1)
Term of office. Members of the Zoning Board of Appeals shall
be appointed for three-year terms so arranged that as nearly as
possible 1/3 of the terms shall expire each year.
(2)
Associate Board members. The Town Council may appoint not more
than six associate members for similar terms as provided in
Subsection A(2).
(3)
Election of officers. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall elect a
Chairman and clerk from its own membership each year.
(4)
Removal of members. Members may only be removed for cause by
the Town Council after a hearing.
(5)
Vacancies. In case of a vacancy, inability to act, or interest on the
part of a member of the Board, the Chairman of the Zoning Board
of Appeals may designate a duly appointed associate member to act
to fill the vacancy.
(6)
A.
General powers.
The Zoning Board of Appeals shall have the following powers:
Appeals from administrative official. To hear and decide an
appeal taken by any person aggrieved by reason of their
inability to obtain a permit from any administrative official
under the provisions of Chapter 40A of the General Laws, or by
any officer or board of the Town, or by any person aggrieved by
any order or decision of the Building Commissioner, or other
administrative official in violation of any provision of Chapter
40A of the General Laws or of this chapter.
(a)
Special permits. To hear and decide applications for special
permits for exceptions as provided for in Chapter 40A of the
General Laws and in this chapter.
(b)
Variances. To authorize upon appeal or upon petition in cases
where a particular use is sought for which no permit is
required, with respect to a particular parcel of land or to an
existing building thereon, a variance from the terms of this
chapter where, owing to conditions especially affecting such
parcel or such building but not affecting generally the zoning
(c)
(1)
B.
§ 240-125 BARNSTABLE CODE § 240-125
232:578
district in which it is located, a literal enforcement of the
provisions of this chapter would involve substantial hardship,
financial or otherwise to the appellant, and where desirable
relief may be granted without substantial detriment to the
public good and without nullifying or substantially derogating
from the intent or purpose of this chapter, but not otherwise.
Other powers. To act as a Board of Appeals under the
provisions of Chapter 41, §§ 81Y, 81Z, 81AA, and 81BB of the
General Laws.
(d)
Use variances. To authorize variances for uses in accordance
with the provisions of this chapter; provided, however, that no
such variances shall be granted within 300 feet of the major
arteries known as Route 28, Route 132, Route 149 and West
Main Street and Route 6A, within the Marstons Mills Village
District (MMVD) and the West Barnstable Village Business
District (WBVBD) and within 300 feet of the MMVD and
WBVBD boundary. [Amended 6-17-2010 by Order No.
2010-122; 9-8-2011 by Order No. 2011-138; 3-21-2013 by
Order No. 2013-060]
(e)
In exercise of the foregoing enumerated powers, the Zoning Board
of Appeals shall take into consideration the same types of evidence
as referred to in § 240-123D. [Amended 11-2-1995 by Order No.
95-198]
(2)
Special permit provisions. The Zoning Board of Appeals may grant
special permits only for uses specifically provided for as such in this
chapter.
Public hearing required. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall, within
65 days after the filing of a special permit application with the
Town Clerk or the Board, hold a public hearing on said application
as per Chapter 808, Acts of 1975, as amended. Special permits
shall not be issued until said public hearing is held.
(1)
Standards for granting special permits. A decision of the Zoning
Board of Appeals on an application for a special permit shall be
based on the following:
Whether or not the application falls within the category
specifically excepted by this chapter.
(a)
An evaluation of all the evidence presented at the public
hearing by the petitioner and interested parties as it relates to
the fulfillment of the spirit and intent of this chapter without
substantial detriment to the public good or the neighborhood
affected.
(b)
(2)
C.
§ 240-125 WASTEWATER DISCHARGE § 240-125
232:579
§ 240-126. Variance provisions. [Amended 10-7-1993 by Order No.
94-014]
The Zoning Board of Appeals may grant variances as provided for within
this chapter and in accordance with MGL Ch. 40A, § 10, provided that,
when an application for a variance proposes a development or activity
which would require site plan review in accordance with § 240-100, the
applicant should submit to the Zoning Board of Appeals a site plan which
A site plan has been reviewed and found approvable in
accordance with Article IX herein subject only to the issuance
of a special permit. [Added 11-7-1987 by Art. 1]
(c)
Validity. [Amended 5-7-2009 by Order No. 2009-077]
Period of validity: A special permit shall become void within
two years from the date of issue unless any construction work
contemplated thereby shall have commenced and proceeded
in good faith continuously to completion, or, if no construction
work is contemplated by the special permit, the premises shall
be open for business or in full use under said special permit.
The two-year period shall not include time required to pursue
or await determination of an appeal referred to in MGL Ch.
40A, §17. However, the special permit granting authority, in its
discretion, may extend the time for exercise of such rights for
a period not to exceed a total of one year upon a showing of
good cause; and provided, further, that the request for such
extension is filed with the special permit granting authority
prior to the expiration of said two-year period. If the permit
granting authority does not grant such extension, upon the
expiration of the original two-year period, such special permit
shall become void.
(a)
Retroactive applicability: The period of validity for any special
permit in effect on the effective date of these provisions shall
be two years from the date of issue, unless further extended
pursuant to Subsection C(3)(a) above. The period of validity for
any special permit that would have lapsed before the effective
date of these provisions, but for which a request for extension
was filed prior to its lapse, shall be two years from the date of
issue, unless further extended pursuant to Subsection C(3)(a)
above.
(b)
(3)
Subsequent amendments. Construction or operations under a
building or special permit shall conform to any subsequent
amendment of the ordinance unless the use or construction is
commenced within a period of not more than six months after
the issuance of said permit and in cases involving construction,
unless such construction is continued through to completion as
continuously and expeditiously as is reasonable.
(4)
§ 240-125 BARNSTABLE CODE § 240-126
232:580
has been reviewed and found approvable in accordance with Article IX
herein, subject only to the issuance of a variance.
§ 240-126 WASTEWATER DISCHARGE § 240-126
232:581

ARTICLE XIV
Amendment; Definitions; Moratorium
§ 240-127. Zoning amendment procedures
All amendments to the Zoning Ordinance shall be in accordance with
Massachusetts General Law, Chapter 40A, § 5.
§ 240-128. Definitions.
In the interpretation of this chapter, the following words and terms are
to be used and interpreted as defined herein unless the context otherwise
requires:
ACTIVE ADULT DWELLING — An attached dwelling unit (apartment)
intended and operated for occupancy by persons 55 years of age or older in
which at least 80% of the occupied units are occupied by at least one person
who is 55 years of age or older in accordance with applicable requirements
of federal and Massachusetts law.[Added 5-19-2016 by Order No.
2016-146]
ACUTELY HAZARDOUS WASTE — As defined in MGL Ch. 21C.[Added
8-19-1993 by Order No. 93-105]
ADJOINING — When used to modify "lot" or "lots," shall mean that the said
lots share a common boundary or property line for at least 20 continuous
feet.[Added 11-2-1995 by Order No. 95-198]
ADULT BOOKSTORE — An establishment having as a substantial or
significant portion of its stock-in-trade, books, magazines, and other
material, which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis
depicting, describing or relating to sexual conduct or sexual excitement as
defined in MGL Ch. 272, § 31. For purposes of this definition, "substantial
or significant portion of stock" shall mean greater than 25% of the subject
establishment's inventory stock or greater than 25% of subject premises'
gross floor area, or 200 square feet, whichever is greater.[Added 6-4-1998
by Order No. 98-064]
ADULT MOTION-PICTURE THEATRE — An enclosed building used for
presenting material, motion picture films, video cassettes, cable television,
slides or any other such visual material distinguished by an emphasis
on matter depicting, describing, or relating to sexual conduct or sexual
excitement as defined in MGL Ch. 272, § 31.[Added 6-4-1998 by Order
No. 98-064]
ADULT PARAPHERNALIA STORE — An establishment having as a
substantial or significant portion of its stock devices, objects, tools, or toys
which are distinguished by their association with sexual activity, including
sexual conduct or sexual excitement as defined in MGL Ch. 272, § 31. For
purposes of this definition, "substantial or significant portion of stock" shall
mean greater than 25% of the subject establishment's inventory stock or
greater than 25% of subject premises' gross floor area, or 200 square feet,
whichever is greater.[Added 6-4-1998 by Order No. 98-064]
§ 240-127 WASTEWATER DISCHARGE § 240-128
232:583
ADULT VIDEO STORES — An establishment having a substantial or
significant portion of its stock-in-trade for sale or rent, movies, videos, and
similar audio/visual media, which are distinguished or characterized by
their emphasis depicting, describing, or relating to sexual conduct or sexual
excitement as defined in MGL Ch 272, § 31. For purposes of this definition,
"substantial or significant portion of stock" shall mean greater than 25% of
the subject establishment's inventory stock or greater than 25% of subject
premises' gross floor area, or 200 square feet, whichever is greater.[Added
6-4-1998 by Order No. 98-064]
ADULT USE — As defined herein, an adult bookstore, adult paraphernalia
store, adult motion-picture theatre establishment, or an establishment
which displays live nudity, or any other business or establishment
characterized by an emphasis depicting, describing or related to sexual
conduct or sexual excitement as defined in MGL Ch. 272, § 31. Adult use
shall include an establishment with a combination of adult use materials
as listed above including books, magazines, devices, objects, tools, or toys,
movies, videos, and any similar audio/visual media for sale or rent, which
are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis depicting, describing,
or relating to sexual conduct or sexual excitement as defined in MGL Ch.
272, § 31, which in combination, is either greater than 25% of the subject
establishment's inventory stock or greater than 25% of subject premises'
gross floor area, or 200 square feet, whichever is greater.[Added 6-4-1998
by Order No. 98-064]
AGRICULTURE AND RELATED USES — The adoption of this definition
is explicitly intended to be a clarification of existing ordinances and is
not intended to be a new restriction.[Added 10-7-1999 by Order No.
99-160A]
APARTMENT UNIT — That portion of the floor area of a single-family
dwelling or a multifamily dwelling designed for occupancy by a single
family.[Amended 3-1-2018 by Order No. 2018-053]
For the purposes of § 240-8A(3), agriculture, horticulture, floriculture
and viticulture on a parcel of land more than five acres subject to
statutory exemption pursuant to MGL Ch 40A, § 3, shall be defined to
mean what they mean under state statute.
A.
For the purposes of § 240-8DA(4), on a parcel of land five acres or less
in size, the terms agriculture, horticulture, viticulture, aquaculture or
floriculture shall not include:
(1) The sale of products or plants grown elsewhere;
(2) The storage of loam, mulch, gravel, and similar materials;
(3) The storage of plants for installation, use or sale elsewhere;
(4) The parking, storage or use of heavy equipment; and
The assembling of crews for the purpose of landscape construction
and maintenance at off-site locations.
(5)
B.
§ 240-128 BARNSTABLE CODE § 240-128
232:584
ASSISTED LIVING DWELLING — An attached dwelling unit (apartment) in
which supportive services are offered for individuals who need assistance in
activities of daily living.[Added 5-19-2016 by Order No. 2016-146]
BED-AND-BREAKFAST — Tourist and guest accommodations located within
an owner-occupied, single-family residential dwelling unit, let for
compensation for brief periods of time, customarily less than two weeks
long, without cooking facilities accessible to the guests; the temporary
abode of visitors who have a permanent residence elsewhere.[Added
2-20-1997]
BOATHOUSE — A building used solely for the storage of boats and related
equipment.
BUILDING HEIGHT — The vertical distance from the ground level to the
plate.
DOCK or PIER — A combination of assembled materials that may be used
as access to the water and extending below the reach of mean high water,
including but not limited to, the following:[Amended 2-1-2001]
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY — A detached residential building designed
for and occupied by a single family and providing complete independent
living facilities for one or more persons, including permanent provisions
for living, sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation.[Amended 3-1-2018 by
Order No. 2018-053]
DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY — A detached residential building designed for
and occupied by two families.
ESTABLISHMENT WHICH DISPLAYS LIVE NUDITY — An establishment
which provides live entertainment for its patrons, which includes the display
of nudity, as that term is defined in MGL Ch. 272, § 31.
FAMILY APARTMENT — An apartment unit within a single-family dwelling
intended to be occupied only by family members of the property owner
and which provides complete independent living facilities for one or more
persons, as outlined herein, including permanent provisions for living,
sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitization.[Amended 3-1-2018 by Order
No. 2018-053]
FAMILY MEMBER — Any person who is related by blood or marriage.
FLOOR AREA, GROSS — The sum of all floor areas within a building or
structure, measured from the perimeter of the outside walls of the building
under consideration, without deduction for hallways, stairs, closets,
thickness of walls, columns, or other features. It shall include all areas
capable of being used for human occupancy, including all basement floor
Elevated open, pile-supported structure including gangways, floats,
extensions, including ells and tees, dolphins, outhaul piles, and
attendant pilings;
A.
B. Floating dock or pier; and
C. Float, dock or pier installed for seasonal use, whether fixed or floating.
§ 240-128 WASTEWATER DISCHARGE § 240-128
232:585
area, mezzanine and attic space and enclosed porches.[Amended
10-7-1993 by Order No. 94-016]
HALF STORY — That space above the plate line but below the ridgeline
in an area commonly called the "attic space," provided that the gross
floor area of the half story shall not exceed 66% of the gross floor area
immediately below the half story.[Added 6-28-2001 by Order No.
2001-036]
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS — As defined in Chapter 108, Hazardous
Materials, of the Code of the Town of Barnstable.[Added 8-19-1993 by
Order No. 93-105]
HAZARDOUS WASTE — As defined in MGL Ch. 21C.[Added 8-19-1993 by
Order No. 93-105]
INTENSIFICATION OF USE — Any new construction, reconstruction,
alteration, remodeling, repair, enlargement, change in use, increase in
capacity, or addition of service resulting in greater off-street parking
demand.
LOT — A single area of land in one ownership defined by metes and bounds
or boundary lines, no portion of which is bisected by a street.
LOT COVERAGE — The term "maximum lot coverage as % of lot area"
where used as a column heading in bulk regulations shall mean the
maximum lot coverage by structures as a percent of lot area.[10-4-1990 by
Order No. 90-68]
LOT WIDTH — The width of any lot shall be measured wholly within the lot
at the building setback line along a straight line parallel to a line connecting
the intersection of the front boundary with the lot side lines, except that an
owner of land may establish his own setback line at a distance greater than
that required, and the lot width may be determined at the setback line so
established.
MARIJUANA — Has the meaning given "marihuana" in Chapter 94C of the
General Laws.[Added 2-6-2014 by Order No. 2014-050]
MARIJUANA DISPENSARY, REGISTERED — Also known as "RMD" or
"medical marijuana treatment center," shall mean an establishment
properly registered with the Massachusetts Department of Public Health
under 105 CMR 725.100 that acquires, cultivates, possesses, processes
(including development of related products such as edible marijuana
infused products, tinctures, aerosols, oils, or ointments), transfers,
transports, sells, distributes, dispenses, or administers marijuana, products
containing marijuana, related supplies, or educational materials to
registered qualifying patients or their personal caregivers.[Added
2-6-2014 by Order No. 2014-050]
PERSONAL WIRELESS SERVICE FACILITIES — Facilities for personal
wireless service including commercial mobile radio services, unlicensed
wireless services and common carrier wireless exchange access services
as defined by the Telecommunications Act of 1996.[Added 6-3-1999 by
Order No. 99-74A]
§ 240-128 BARNSTABLE CODE § 240-128
232:586
RETAIL — The term "retail" shall not be construed to include "restaurant."
SETBACK — The distance between a street line and the front building line
of a principal building or structure, projected to the side lines of the lot.
Where a lot abuts on more than one street, front yard setbacks shall apply
from all streets.
SHAPE FACTOR (LOT SHAPE FACTOR) — The numerical value resulting
from:
SHUTTLE SERVICE — Use of a multipassenger vehicle to shuttle parking
lot patrons between remote parking lots, parking facilities, and
transportation terminals.[Added 7-21-2016 by Order No. 2016-166]
SIGN — See Article VII, § 240-59 et seq., herein.
SPECIMEN TREES — A native, introduced or naturalized tree which is
sufficiently well grown to be an important visual element on a site. Any tree
with a dbh of six inches or greater is eligible to be considered a specimen
tree. Trees that have a small height at maturity, or are slow growing, such
as a flowering dogwood or American holly with a dbh of four inches or
larger, are eligible to be considered specimen trees.[Amended 3-11-1999
by Order No. 99-056]
SPORTS AND RECREATION FACILITY — A facility that offers indoor and
outdoor sporting, recreation, physical fitness and training, and athletic
competition venues. Such a facility may include multiple structures
including a field house that contains one indoor ice rink, and one or more
playing fields, athletic courts, track space, swimming pools, fitness training
centers, locker rooms, batting cages, accessory retail and sports related
proshops, athletic and fitness training center, including rehabilitation
facilities, food concessions and restaurant, child-care areas, sports-related
museums and memorabilia, accessory office space and community meeting
rooms. Such facilities may also contain outdoor playing fields, tracks and
courts, swimming pool, viewing stands, scoreboards, shall not have an
outdoor ice rink, outdoor lighting, and detached comfort stations
(restrooms/concessions) and other accessory structures.[Added
8-17-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-165]
STORY — That portion of a building included between the upper surface of
a floor and the upper surface of the floor or roof next above and having at
least 1/2 its height above grade.
STRUCTURE — Any production or piece of work, artificially built up or
composed of parts and joined together in some definite manner, not
including poles, fences and such minor incidental improvements.
Division of the square of the perimeter in feet of a lot by the area in
square feet thereof; or
A.
Division of the square of the perimeter in feet of that portion of a lot
intended as the site for building by the area in square feet thereof.
[Amended 1-20-2005 by Order No. 2005-038]
B.
§ 240-128 WASTEWATER DISCHARGE § 240-128
232:587
TENT — A temporary shelter with a frame supporting a cloth or similar
flexible covering, without a fixed location, foundation or permanent
anchors.[Added 2-22-1996 by Order No. 95-194]
UPLAND — All lands not defined herein as wetlands.
VERY SMALL QUANTITY GENERATORS — Those operations that generate
less than 26 gallons or 220 pounds of dry weight of hazardous waste per
month and no acutely hazardous waste as defined in 310 CMR 30.00.
WETLANDS — The land under the ocean or under any bay, lake, pond, river,
stream, creek or estuary; any wet meadows, marshes, swamps, bogs, areas
where high groundwater, flowing or standing surface water or ice provide
a significant part of the supporting substrata for a plant community for at
least five months of the year, lowland subject to any tidal action or annual
storm flooding or flowage, or any flat, beach, dune or other shifting sand
formation.77
§ 240-129. Temporary moratorium on medical marijuana treatment
centers and associated activities relating to Ballot Question 3.
[Added 3-7-2013 by Order No. 2013-065]
There shall be a temporary moratorium on the use of land or structures
in the Town for the siting of one or more medical marijuana treatment
centers and associated activities relating to Ballot Question 3.
A.
No building permit, special permit, variance, site plan approval
decision or other permit may be issued under this Zoning Ordinance
for the purpose of establishing a medical marijuana treatment center or
associated activities.
B.
The moratorium shall be in effect through and including January 1,
2014, or until 180 days after the effective date of the final regulations
promulgated by the State Department of Public Health relating to
Ballot Question 3, whichever occurs first.
C.
During the moratorium period, the Town shall undertake a planning
process to address the potential direct and secondary impacts of siting
one or more medical marijuana treatment centers in the Town and
shall review and consider the Department of Public Health regulations
regarding the siting of such centers and related uses, and shall consider
proposing the adoption of zoning amendments to address the potential
direct and secondary impacts of siting one or more medical marijuana
treatment centers and related uses in the Town.
D.
Zoning amendments resulting from the aforementioned study process
shall be deemed to be continuations of this moratorium and not new
zoning amendments. Applications for permits submitted after the first
publication of the notice of the public hearing which results in the
E.
77.Editor's Note: Former § 240-129, Hyannis Downtown 500 Block Moratorium Zone, added
4-10-2003 by Town Council agenda item 2003-045, which immediately followed this
section, was removed from the Code because it ceased to be effective on 5-10-2005.
§ 240-128 BARNSTABLE CODE § 240-129
232:588
§ 240-129.1. Temporary moratorium on recreational marijuana
establishments and marijuana retailers and associated activities.
[Added 4-27-2017 by Order No. 2017-108]
adoption of this moratorium but before the moratorium's effective date,
shall be administered according to established procedures until the
effective date of this moratorium, and if a permit or other relief is
granted prior to such effective date, it shall be subject to the
effectiveness of this moratorium and shall be issued at the peril of
the permit applicant and/or recipient. During the moratorium, any
application shall be denied on the basis of this moratorium. In no event
shall any permit or other relief sought after the first publication of the
notice of the public hearing create or result in any protections with
respect to the land, its uses or structures upon it.
Unless extended, continued or modified by a subsequent action of Town
Council, this section shall cease to be effective January 2, 2014, or 180
days after the effective date of the final regulations promulgated by the
Department of Public Health relating to Ballot Question 3, whichever
occurs first.
F.
Definitions. As used in this § 240-129.1, the following terms shall have
the meanings indicated:
MARIJUANA ACCESSORIES — Equipment, products, devices or
materials of any kind that are intended or designed for use in planting,
propagating, cultivating, growing, harvesting, manufacturing,
compounding, converting, producing, processing, preparing, testing,
analyzing, packaging, repackaging, storing, containing, ingesting,
inhaling or otherwise introducing marijuana into the human body.
MARIJUANA CULTIVATOR — An entity licensed to cultivate, process
and package marijuana, to deliver marijuana to marijuana
establishments and to transfer marijuana to other marijuana
establishments, but not to consumers.
MARIJUANA ESTABLISHMENT — A marijuana cultivator, marijuana
testing facility, marijuana product manufacturer, marijuana retailer or
any other type of licensed marijuana-related business.
MARIJUANA MANUFACTURING — To compound, blend, extract, infuse
or otherwise make or prepare a marijuana product.
MARIJUANA PRODUCTS — Products that have been manufactured and
contain marijuana or an extract from marijuana, including concentrated
forms of marijuana and products composed of marijuana and other
ingredients that are intended for use or consumption, including edible
products, beverages, topical products, ointments, oils and tinctures.
MARIJUANA PRODUCT MANUFACTURER — An entity licensed to
obtain, manufacture, process and package marijuana and marijuana
products, to deliver marijuana and marijuana products to marijuana
A.
§ 240-129 WASTEWATER DISCHARGE § 240-129.1
232:589
establishments and to transfer marijuana and marijuana products to
other marijuana establishments, but not to consumers.
MARIJUANA TESTING FACILITY — An entity licensed to test marijuana
and marijuana products, including certification for potency and the
presence of contaminants.
RECREATIONAL MARIJUANA RETAILER — An entity licensed to
purchase and deliver marijuana and marijuana products from
marijuana establishments and to deliver, sell or otherwise transfer
marijuana and marijuana products to marijuana establishments and to
consumers.
No building permit, special permit, variance, site plan approval
decision or other permit may be issued under this chapter for
recreational marijuana establishments and marijuana retailers or
associated activities, as those terms are defined herein.
B.
The moratorium shall be in effect through and including December 31,
2018.
C.
During the moratorium period, the Town shall undertake a planning
process to address the complex and novel planning, legal and public
safety issues related to recreational marijuana establishments and
marijuana retailers, to consider the Cannabis Control Commission
regulations regarding recreational marijuana establishments and
marijuana retailers and related uses, to determine whether the Town
shall restrict any, or all, licenses for recreational marijuana
establishments and marijuana retailers and to determine whether the
Town will prohibit on-site consumption at recreational marijuana
establishments and marijuana retailers and shall consider adopting new
provisions of this chapter to address the direct and secondary impacts
and operation of recreational marijuana establishments and marijuana
retailers and related uses.
D.
Applications for permits submitted after the first publication of the
notice of the public hearing which results in the adoption of this
moratorium but before its effective date shall be dealt with in due
course until the effective date of this moratorium; and if a permit or
other relief is granted prior to such effective date, it shall be subject
to the effectiveness of this moratorium and shall be issued subject to
any reliance thereon being at the peril of the recipient. During the
effective period of this moratorium, any application shall be denied on
the basis of this moratorium. In no event shall any permit or other relief
applied for after the first publication of the notice of the public hearing
create or result in any protections with respect to the land, its uses or
structures upon it,.
E.
Unless extended, continued or modified by a subsequent action of Town
Council, this section shall cease to be effective on January 1, 2019.
F.
§ 240-129.1 BARNSTABLE CODE § 240-129.1
232:590
Severability. The provisions of this section are severable. If any
provision, paragraph, sentence, or clause of this section or the
application thereof to any person, establishment, or circumstances
shall be held invalid, such invalidity shall not affect the other provisions
or application of this section.
G.
§ 240-129.1 WASTEWATER DISCHARGE § 240-129.1
232:591

ARTICLE XV
District of Critical Planning Concern Regulations
[Added 7-16-2009 by Order No. 2009-137]
§ 240-130. Centerville Village District.
Authority. This article is adopted under the authority of the Home Rule
Amendment, Article 89 of the Constitution of the Commonwealth, and the
Cape Cod Commission Act, Chapter 716 of the Acts of 1989.
§ 240-130.1. Purposes and intent.
§ 240-130.2. Definitions.
As used in the CVD, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
APARTMENT — One or more rooms with private bath and kitchen facilities
comprising an independent self-contained dwelling unit located in a
The purposes and intent of this section is to guide development and
redevelopment in Centerville Village that:
Promotes a location-appropriate scale and traditional mix of
business, institutional and residential land uses that contribute
to and respect the historic character and historic neighborhood
development patterns;
(1)
Acknowledges the historic context of the village, including the
National Register District which encompasses properties in the
northern portion of the district;
(2)
Protects and preserves the historic and scenic streetscape and
minimizes traffic congestion;
(3)
Provides a variety of functions that support residents' day-to-day
use of the district;
(4)
Supports and enhances the diverse local economy and retains
established village goods and service offerings;
(5)
Preserves and protects the traditional New England village
character of Centerville through architectural design that
replicates in scale and character the best examples of traditional
neighborhood design from the historic towns and villages of Cape
Cod and New England to enhance the aesthetic quality of
Barnstable as a whole.
(6)
A.
The further purpose and intent of this section is to enable the Town
of Barnstable to enter into development agreements (hereinafter
"regulatory agreements") under Chapter 168 of the Code of the Town
of Barnstable (Barnstable Code) within the Centerville Village District
(CVD).
B.
§ 240-130 WASTEWATER DISCHARGE § 240-130.2
232:593
building containing two or more such rooms or suites or located in a
building devoted primarily to nonresidential use or in a mixed-use building.
BED-AND-BREAKFAST — Tourist and guest accommodations located within
an owner-occupied, single-family residential dwelling unit, let for
compensation for brief periods of time, customarily less than two weeks
long, without cooking facilities accessible to the guests; or the temporary
abode of visitors who have a permanent residence elsewhere.
BUILDING HEIGHT — The vertical distance between the grade and the
highest point of a gable, hip or gambrel roof; the highest point of the coping
of a flat roof.
GRADE — The referenced plane of the average of all finished ground level
adjoining the building or structure for a distance of six feet from all exterior
walls.
HALF STORY — That space above the plate line but below the ridgeline
in an area commonly called the "attic space," provided that the gross
floor area of the half story shall not exceed 66% of the gross floor area
immediately below the half story.
ICE CREAM SPECIALTY RETAIL USE — An establishment specializing in
the retail sale of ice cream for consumption on or off site or carry-out
consumption that may include a seating area for food service use as an
accessory use to the ice cream specialty retail or an ice cream retail use
in existence at the time of the adoption of this section. Accessory food
service use may sell and serve by wait staff a variety of foods that may be
prepared on site. Ice cream specialty retail and any accessory food service
use is subject to formula business limitations as described herein. Ice
cream specialty retail may include on-site ice cream product preparation for
wholesale sales; provided, however, in no case shall wholesale sales of ice
cream product for use off-site become the principal use; truck distribution
and delivery activity necessary to the wholesale sale of ice cream product
for off-site use shall not create additional congestion; and the use shall
not generate noise that violates Town ordinances, or detract from the
established character within the CVD.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE — A surface which prevents the penetration of
precipitation or other liquids into the ground, including roofs, concrete,
asphalt, natural stone, sidewalks, etc. Any area designed for vehicle use or
vehicle parking covered with porous pavers may become impervious over
time and may, at the discretion of the Building Commissioner, be considered
impervious surface.
INN — A commercial structure used for overnight lodging accessed through
interior hallways which may include the provision of meals and incidental
§ 240-130.2 BARNSTABLE CODE § 240-130.2
232:594
related services to lodgers or a motel or motor inn use in existence at the
time of the adoption of this section.
LIBRARY — A building or room that houses a collection of books, records,
literary documents or other reference materials for borrowing, reading,
study, education or reference and which is owned or operated by a nonprofit
educational corporation.
LOT AREA — The upland area of the lot.
MIXED-USE DEVELOPMENT — Development including at least one
residential unit and at least one nonresidential use on a single lot or several
nonresidential uses on a single lot.
NONPROFIT EDUCATIONAL USE — An educational use conducted by a
not-for-profit corporation whose articles of incorporation permit it to
engage in educational activities and "educational purposes" as its principal
permitted use within the meaning of MGL c. 40A, § 3, including but not
limited to libraries and museums.
PROFESSIONAL OR BUSINESS OFFICE — Office, but not including
medical or dental offices.
RELIGIOUS INSTITUTION — An institution engaged in "religious purposes"
within the meaning of MGL c. 40A, § 3.
SETBACK — The required distance between every structure and lot line of
the lot on which it is located.
SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENCE — A detached residential building designed
for and occupied by a single family.
SMALL-SCALE FOOD SERVICE — An establishment where food is served
to customers by wait staff. Small-scale food service does not include
restaurants designed to serve a large volume of customers. Small-scale food
service is subject to formula business limitations as described herein. These
uses are intended to increase pedestrian traffic.
SMALL-SCALE RETAIL — Small stores and businesses, including, but not
limited to, corner groceries, artist space, bookstore, galleries and other
small retail uses typically found in small New England towns. Small-scale
retail does not include retail or commercial buildings or storage designed
to serve a large volume of customers, e.g. gasoline and oil filling stations,
garages for automotive or machine repair. Small-scale retail is subject to
formula business limitations as described herein. These uses are intended
to increase pedestrian activity.
STORY — That portion of a building included between the upper surface of
a floor and the upper surface of the floor or roof next above and having at
least 1/2 its height above grade.
STRUCTURE — Anything constructed or erected on the ground or which is
attached to something located on the ground. Structures include buildings,
sheds, swimming pools and towers, but shall exclude fences of six feet or
less in height, flagpoles and retaining walls.
§ 240-130.2 WASTEWATER DISCHARGE § 240-130.2
232:595
UPLAND — All lands not defined herein as wetlands.
WETLANDS — The land under the ocean or under any bay, lake, pond, river,
stream, creek or estuary; any wet meadows, marshes, swamps, bogs, areas
where high groundwater, flowing or standing surface water or ice provide
a significant part of the supporting substrata for a plant community for at
least five months of the year, lowland subject to any tidal action or annual
storm flooding or flowage, or any flat, beach, dune or other shifting sand
formation.
§ 240-130.3. Permitted uses.
The following principal and accessory uses are permitted in the Centerville
Village District subject to the use limitations outlined below. Other uses
of an appropriate scale and function may also be considered subject to a
regulatory agreement and are subject to the use limitations outlined below.
Municipal uses are exempt from these regulations.
Use limitations. Permitted retail establishment, lodging establishment,
restaurant, or take-out food franchise shall not include a business
which is required by contractual or other arrangement to maintain
one or more of the following items: standardized ("formula") array of
services and/or merchandise, trademark, logo, service mark, symbol,
decor, architecture, layout, uniform, or similar standardized features
and which causes is it to be substantially identical to more than 14
other businesses regardless of ownership or location. Drive-up windows
and/or drive-through facilities are prohibited.
A.
Principal uses.
*Ice cream specialty retail
*Mixed-use development
*Professional or business office
Single-family residence
*Small-scale food service
*Small-scale retail
*Bed-and-breakfast
*Inn
*Subject to use limitations as described in § 240-130.3A.
B.
Accessory uses.
Automated banking facilities (ATM) within a principal building or
a walk-up facility located in a rear or side yard that also meets
landscaping and lighting guidelines of this section.
(1)
Garages accessory to a single-family residence. Such structures
shall be located in the rear or side yard. The footprint of the
garage shall not exceed 40% of the footprint of the single-family
(2)
C.
§ 240-130.2 BARNSTABLE CODE § 240-130.3
232:596
§ 240-130.4. Continuation; changes to use; damaged structures.
residence and may consist of 1 1/2 stories with a pitched roof
unless otherwise permitted for residential use.
(3) Apartment.
Exempt uses.
Religious institutions, accessory day-care centers, and nonprofit
educational uses are permitted as exempt uses within the CVD.
These uses shall, however, be subject to and in conformance with
the reasonable bulk, density, design and development regulations
of the CVD as set forth in § 240-130.1A, Purposes and intent,
§ 240-130.6, Dimensional, bulk and other requirements,
§ 240-130.7, Design guidelines, and § 240-130.8, Site development
standards.
(1)
Where the exempt use does not comply with said regulations,
the Zoning Board of Appeals shall, by modification permit, modify
said regulations if compliance with the regulation substantially
diminishes or detracts from the usefulness of a proposed
development or impairs the character of the development so as to
affect its intended use; provided, however, that the relief granted
will not create a public safety hazard along adjacent roadways and
will not create a nuisance to other surrounding properties.
(2)
A modification permit shall be subject to the same procedural
requirements as a special permit except that approval of a
modification permit shall require a simple majority of the members
of the Board.
(3)
D.
Continuation. Legally established structures, uses and site
improvements in existence at the time of the adoption of this section
shall be allowed to continue.
A.
Change, expansion or alteration of uses and structures.
As of right.
The normal and customary repair and maintenance of a
building or structure is permitted as of right.
(a)
The alteration and expansion of a building or structure is
permitted as of right, provided that the alteration or expansion
conforms in all other respects with all applicable requirements
of this chapter.
(b)
(1)
By special permit. Alterations or expansions of a building or
structure that do not qualify under as-of-right provisions shall be
permitted only by a special permit from the Zoning Board of
Appeals, the special permit granting authority (SPGA) for the CVD.
In granting such special permit, the Board must find that the
(2)
B.
§ 240-130.3 WASTEWATER DISCHARGE § 240-130.4
232:597
proposed alterations and/or expansion are not substantially more
detrimental, by standards set out herein, to the surrounding
neighborhood under this chapter, § 240-130.1A, Purposes and
intent, § 240-130.3A, Use limitations, and, where applicable,
§ 240-130.2, Definitions.
Special permit for dimensional relief. The SPGA may provide relief from
minimum lot area, minimum lot frontage, maximum building setback,
minimum yard setbacks, facade length requirements, and ground floor
window requirements when such relief ensures that the proposed
development is consistent with the § 240-130.1A, Purposes and intent,
and the applicant demonstrates undue hardship without desired relief.
C.
Re-establishment of damaged or destroyed building or structure.
The re-establishment of a previously legally established use and/or
building or structure which has been destroyed or damaged by fire,
acts of nature or other catastrophe shall be permitted as of right,
provided that the Building Commissioner has determined that all
the following conditions are met:
The reconstruction or repair will not, as determined by the
Building Commissioner, materially increase the gross floor
area or height of the building or structure beyond that which
previously existed, nor materially increase the footprint of the
structure, or materially change the grade.
(a)
If the building's location on the lot is to be changed, it will
change in a manner that will be closer to complying with the
dimensional and bulk regulations.
(b)
The reconstruction or repair will not constitute an expansion
or intensification of any use.
(c)
In the case of any use in which it would otherwise be required,
the site plan review process has been followed.
(d)
Design and architecture of damaged or destroyed buildings
and structures in existence at the time of the adoption of this
regulation may be replicated. If the Building Commissioner
finds that the structure is to be rebuilt to replicate what existed
before the damage or destruction, the CVD design guidelines
do not apply.
(e)
A building permit has been applied for within two years from
the date of damage or destruction.
(f)
(1)
Discontinuance: Any legally established structure which no longer
complies with the provisions of the CVD that has been damaged
or destroyed shall be discontinued unless a building permit has
been applied for within two years from the date of damage or
(2)
D.
§ 240-130.4 BARNSTABLE CODE § 240-130.4
232:598
§ 240-130.5. Additional provisions.
destruction, and construction is continuously pursued to
completion.
Other regulations. The following provisions of the Barnstable Code are
hereby incorporated into this regulation: § 240-7, Application of district
regulations; § 240-9C and D; § 240-10, Prohibited uses; § 240-34,
Floodplain District; § 240-43, regarding accessory uses; § 240-46A and
B, home occupations; Article VI, Off Street Parking Regulations;
Sections 240-52, 240-53.B through .E ; and Sign Regulations § 240-59
through 62, and Section 240-67; Article XI, Growth Management,
§§ 240-110 through 240-122; Article IX, Site Plan Review; Article XIII,
Administration and Enforcement, §§ 240-123 and 240-124; § 240-125C
special permit provisions, as these provisions of the Barnstable Code
cited in this section may be amended from time to time. [Amended
5-22-2014 by Order No. 2014-126]
A.
Conflicts. Unless otherwise stated, the requirements of the Centerville
Village District shall apply to uses and structures within the Centerville
Village District. In the event of a conflict, these regulations shall apply.
B.
Severability. The provisions of this chapter are severable. If any court
of competent jurisdiction shall invalidate any provision herein, such
invalidation shall not affect any other provisions of this chapter. If any
court of competent jurisdiction shall invalidate the application of any
provision of this chapter to a particular case, such invalidation shall
not affect the application of said provision to any other case within the
Town.
C.
§ 240-130.4 WASTEWATER DISCHARGE § 240-130.6
232:599
§ 240-130.6. Dimensional, bulk and other requirements.
Minimum
Yard Setbacks
Maximum Building
Height
Minimum
Lot Area
(square
feet)
Minimum
Lot
Frontage
(feet)
Front2
(feet)
Rear
(feet)
Side
(feet) Feet Stories
Maximum
Lot
Coverage
By
Structures
Total
Impervious
Surface
20,000 or
lot area of
legally
established
lot as of
06/18/
2009
20
20 or
setback of
existing
legally
established
structure
from front
lot line as
of 06/18/
2009,
whichever
is less
0 0 361 2 1/2 35% 80%
NOTES:
(1) Height - maximum building height. The maximum height of buildings or structures is 36 feet or
2 1/2 stories, whichever is less, at the highest point of the roof for roofs with a pitch of at least
six inches in each foot and at the highest point of a gambrel roof. The maximum height for flatroofed
structures is limited to two stories at a maximum of 24 feet.
(2) Setbacks:
(a) The building setback may be modified through a special permit from the Zoning Board of
Appeals upon demonstration to the satisfaction of that Board that redevelopment cannot
meet the minimum setback without undue hardship or due to topography, lot shape or
constraints of existing structures.
(b) Wherever possible parking shall be located within side or rear yard setbacks.
§ 240-130.7. Design guidelines.
Purpose: The purpose of these design guidelines is to enhance the
traditional small-scale village character currently found in the CVD
through the use of compatible building materials, appropriate scale and
architectural details currently found within the district or immediate
surrounding area. New structures are encouraged to complement, but
not necessarily duplicate, surrounding structures.
A.
B. Objectives:
§ 240-130.6 BARNSTABLE CODE § 240-130.7
232:600
To encourage site planning and architectural design that will
enhance the existing historic character of the CVD.
(1)
Ensure that redevelopment and new development is compatible
with the existing character of the CVD while encouraging variety
through flexibility in the application of these design standards.
(2)
Application: The design guidelines set forth herein do not apply to
legally established structures in existence as of the effective date of the
CVD but shall apply to all new development, to any additions to existing
structures and to all reconstruction projects except as provided for in
§ 240-130.4D(1)(e). These design guidelines shall not apply to walk-in
coolers, freezers or their accessories for an ice cream specialty retail
use. Any such coolers, freezers and accessories shall be attached to
the side or rear of the principal structure and shall be appropriately
screened from street view.
Massing: Buildings or portions of buildings with a mass, including
rooflines, over 32 feet in length must divide their elevations into
smaller parts through a variety of architectural elements, including
but not limited to dormers or additive massing as well as
pronounced changes in wall planes. Flat and shed roof
architectural elements are limited to a length of 20 linear feet and
only in combination with other gable or hip roof elements; except
that ground floor open porches may have a longer expanse of shed
roof on a structure that otherwise meets these massing provisions.
(1)
Roof pitch: Except as permitted under massing herein, roof pitch
and pattern for new structures and additions to existing structures
shall complement the roof pitches found on the main rooflines of
existing structures within the CVD and the immediate surrounding
area or at least 4 in 12 where the roofs of surrounding structures
are flat or only slightly pitched.
(2)
Ground floor windows for nonresidential development:
All new nonresidential development, including nonresidential
portions of mixed-use developments, shall provide ground floor
windows along street facades, including windows that allow
view into working areas or lobbies, pedestrian entrances, or
display windows. The glazing pattern shall be aligned in a
regular and traditional pattern as found within the CVD and
the immediate surrounding area.
(a)
Window glazing or films that inhibit two-way visibility, such as
darkly tinted and mirrored windows, are prohibited as ground
floor windows. Mirrored windows are prohibited throughout
the CVD.
(b)
Street facade blank walls greater than four feet in length that
do not include display areas, functional landscape structures
(c)
(3)
C.
§ 240-130.7 WASTEWATER DISCHARGE § 240-130.7
232:601
§ 240-130.8. Site development standards.
All new development and redevelopment and change of use except as
set forth in § 240-130 within the CVD with the exception of single-family
residences shall be subject to the provisions of Article IX, Site Plan Review,
§§ 240-98 through 240-105.
such as a trellis, windows, architectural features, and/or
doorways are prohibited.
Architectural details and materials:
Architectural character of buildings must complement the
historic character of buildings found within the CVD and the
immediate surrounding area.
(a)
Facade materials shall be high-quality, authentic materials
such as wood, stone or brick. Manufactured materials intended
to duplicate the look of natural materials may be allowed.
(b)
External side elements, including but not limited to screening
devices, site walls, enclosed service, loading and refuse areas
and mechanical equipment, shall be designed as an integral
part of the building's architectural character.
(c)
Primary entrance to buildings, other than single-family homes,
shall be distinguished with facade variations, porticos, roof
variations, recesses or other integral architecturally
appropriate building elements.
(d)
Extended bands of corporate or franchise colors are prohibited
in the CVD.
(e)
(f) Metal-sided buildings are prohibited in the CVD.
The following design features shall be incorporated into
structures within the CVD where architecturally appropriate.
Structures shall include at least one of the following elements:
[1] Gable.
[2] Offsets on the building face or roof of at least two inches.
[3] Gable dormers.
[4] Cupolas or other appropriate roof elements.
[5] Covered porches.
(g)
(4)
Access management. To ensure traffic safety, pedestrian safety and
maintain traffic flow, the following standards for new access shall apply
in the CVD:
(1) New access on South Main Street and Main Street:
A.
§ 240-130.7 BARNSTABLE CODE § 240-130.8
232:602
Shall only be allowed where the Building Commissioner
determines that the access will improve internal circulation or
address safety at existing access.
(a)
Interconnections between lots and uses are encouraged to
prevent unsafe turning conflicts and increase pedestrian
safety.
(b)
New driveways on South Main Street and Main Street within
200 feet of any intersection shall not be permitted unless
the Town Engineer determines that the proposed driveway
location will not create new traffic safety hazards or increase
traffic congestion.
(c)
New access shall not be more than 24 feet in width unless the
Building Commissioner or site plan review determines that a wider
width is necessary for safety purposes.
(2)
Parking spaces, computation.
The parking standards contained within the Schedule of Off-Street
Parking Requirements, § 240-56 of the Barnstable Zoning
Ordinance, shall establish the minimum parking requirements,
with the following exceptions:
The use of shared parking for different uses having different
peak hours of demand will be considered in evaluating
compliance with § 240-56. A signed lease agreement or
recorded easement between relevant parties sharing parking
must be provided as part of the site plan approval.
(a)
A permitted use can be changed to another permitted use,
and any permitted or accessory use can be intensified, without
increasing the required off-street parking requirements of
§ 240-56, Schedule of Off-Street Parking Requirements,
provided that:
There is no increase in gross square footage of the
building; and
[1]
There is no reduction in existing parking spaces required
pursuant to § 240-56; and
[2]
A minimum of two on-site parking spaces per dwelling
unit shall be provided. A one-car garage shall count as
one parking space. A two-car garage shall count as two
parking spaces.
[3]
(b)
(1)
Parking spaces shall be provided for new and/or expanded building
area, and for new and/or expanded outdoor uses, as follows:
Parking space requirements for residential mixed use shall be
subject to § 240-130.8B(1) above; and for the residential units
(a)
(2)
B.
§ 240-130.8 WASTEWATER DISCHARGE § 240-130.8
232:603
§ 240-131. Craigville Beach District; statutory authority. [Adopted
1-19-2011 by Ord. No. 11-01 of the Barnstable County Assembly of
Delegates pursuant to Ch. 716 of the Acts of 1989 (Cape Cod
Commission Act)]
Sections 240-131 through 240-131.8 are adopted under the local authority
of the Town of Barnstable and the Cape Cod Commission Act, Chapter 716
of the Acts of 1989.
parking, the parking requirement shall be one parking space
per bedroom for one- and two-bedroom units or a total of two
parking spaces for units with two or more bedrooms.
Parking space requirements for nonresidential uses shall be
subject to § 240-130.8B(1) above.
(b)
Reduction of required parking spaces may be allowed, provided
the Building Commissioner, who may waive up to two spaces, or if
parking is proposed to be reduced by more than two (2) spaces the
Zoning Board of Appeals must find that:
Adequate shared parking is available consistent with
Subsection A(1) above; or
(a)
(b) There are other factors that support the reduction.
(3)
Landscaping. All applications for new nonresidential development and
redevelopment shall be accompanied by a landscape plan that shows
the location within the development of each species of trees, shrubs
and/or other plantings, their suitability for the conditions at the
proposed location and their size at maturity.
Those portions of the front yard not occupied by pedestrian
amenities and public spaces shall be landscaped.
(1)
Existing trees and other features of the land shall be protected in
the development or redevelopment of the site.
(2)
Landscape materials shall be used that, at full growth, will not
overwhelm the site location or interfere with views or pedestrian
activity over time.
(3)
Landscaping plan will adequately provide street trees and will
buffer parking areas from sidewalks and streets.
(4)
C.
Lighting.
All exterior lighting shall use full cutoff light fixtures in which no
more than 2.5% of the total output is emitted at 90° from the
vertical pole or building wall on which it is mounted.
(1)
Flood, area and up lighting shall not cast glare onto neighboring
properties or oncoming traffic.
(2)
D.
§ 240-130.8 BARNSTABLE CODE § 240-131.1
232:604
§ 240-131.1. Purposes and intent. [Adopted 1-19-2011 by Ord. No.
11-01 of the Barnstable County Assembly of Delegates pursuant to
Ch. 716 of the Acts of 1989 (Cape Cod Commission Act)]
§ 240-131.2. District boundaries. [Adopted 1-19-2011 by Ord. No.
11-01 of the Barnstable County Assembly of Delegates pursuant to
Ch. 716 of the Acts of 1989 (Cape Cod Commission Act)]
The purpose and intent of §§ 240-131 through 240-131.8 are to guide
development in the Craigville Beach District pursuant to the Guidelines
of Barnstable County Ordinance 09-10 to ensure that development and
redevelopment:
Contributes to and respects the character and historic
development patterns of the area and minimizes inconsistent
development and redevelopment impacts to the historic and
community character resources in this area;
(1)
Protects and preserves scenic views and vistas and ways to the
water;
(2)
Protects and improves natural resources, including but not limited
to the barrier beach and groundwater and coastal water quality
and minimizes development and redevelopment impacts to the
natural resources and ecosystems in this district;
(3)
Protects human life and property from the hazards of periodic
flooding;
(4)
Preserves the natural flood control characteristics and the flood
control function of the floodplain;
(5)
Preserves and maintains the groundwater table and water
recharge areas within the floodplain. As the entire complex of
coastal wetland resources moves landward due to relative sea level
rise, the Craigville Beach area's coastal floodplains immediately
landward of salt marshes, coastal beaches, barrier beaches, coastal
dunes, and coastal banks require special protection.
(6)
A.
The provisions of §§ 240-131 through 240-131.8 shall apply within the
Craigville Beach District (CBD), as shown on the Zoning Map of the
Town of Barnstable, as amended in Section 1 above.78
A.
Neighborhood Overlays. For the purpose of §§ 240-131 through
240-131.8, the Craigville Beach District is divided into the following
Neighborhood Overlay areas, as shown on the Zoning Map and
identified as:
B.
78.Editor's Note: Section 1 of Ord. No. 11-01 of the Barnstable County Assembly of Delegates
amended the Zoning Map of the Town of Barnstable. A description of said amendment is
included in the Table of Zoning Map Revisions at the end of this chapter.
§ 240-131.1 WASTEWATER DISCHARGE § 240-131.2
232:605
§ 240-131.3. Definitions. [Adopted 1-19-2011 by Ord. No. 11-01 of
the Barnstable County Assembly of Delegates pursuant to Ch. 716
of the Acts of 1989 (Cape Cod Commission Act)]
ACCESSORY USE OR BUILDING — A use or structure which is customarily
incidental to and subordinate in area, extent, and purpose to that of the
principal use or structure.
BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE) — The elevation shown on the Flood
Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) that indicates the water surface elevation
resulting from a flood that has a one-percent chance of equaling or
exceeding that level in any given year.
BEACH CLUB — A membership establishment legally in existence at the
time of the adoption of §§ 240-131 through 240-131.8, not open to the
general public, located in close proximity to a beach and providing
recreational and social activities, including food service, to members.
BUILDING COVERAGE — The percentage of a lot covered by principal and
accessory buildings or structures. For the purposes of §§ 240-131 through
240-131.8, this definition does not include uncovered swimming pools and
tennis courts, and decks not exceeding 100 square feet or 10 feet in length.
BUILDING HEIGHT — The vertical distance from the grade plane to the
highest point of a gable, hip or gambrel roof and the highest point of the
coping of a flat roof. These height limitations shall not apply to chimneys,
cupolas, flagpoles or other similar appurtenances as approved by the
Building Commissioner.
COASTAL BANK — The first significant break in slope beyond the onehundred-
year storm elevation on a seaward face or elevated landform, other
than a coastal dune, which lies at the landward edge of a coastal beach, land
subject to tidal action, or other coastal wetland. The slope of the bank must
be greater than 18% and serve to contain storm flowage, rather than being
inundated by it, or function as a sediment source. (See Barnstable Code,
Wetlands Protection, § 237-5.)
COMMON DRIVEWAY — A form of access which is not a street but extends
from a street and provides common vehicular access to more than one
lot. For the purposes of calculating lot coverage, the common driveway's
impervious surfaces shall be equally allocated among the lots served and/or
benefited by the common driveway in proportion to the sizes of the lots.
CONFERENCE CENTER — A nonprofit religious and educational use legally
in existence at the time of the adoption of §§ 240-131 through 240-131.8,
comprised of guest houses and cottages, single-family residences,
LBSB Long Beach/Short Beach
CB Craigville Beach
CRNB Centerville River North Bank
CV Craigville Village
§ 240-131.2 BARNSTABLE CODE § 240-131.3
232:606
recreational areas, lodging for guests, meeting spaces, and summer
recreational opportunities.
COTTAGE COLONY — A group of three or more detached dwellings, under
one ownership, legally in existence at the time of the adoption of §§ 240-131
through 240-131.8, located on a single lot, which are customarily rented out
to the transient public by day, week, month, or season and occupied on a
seasonal basis only. Cottage colonies shall not be used year round. Cottage
colony structures shall not exceed 1 1/2 stories and 800 square feet of gross
floor area.
DEMOLITION, VOLUNTARY — Destruction of 20% or more of the exterior
walls of a building or the destruction of more than 50% of the roof structure
of a building, not including like-for-like replacement of the roof structure.
ELEVATED STRUCTURE — A structure elevated for the purpose of
Barnstable Code, § 240-34, Floodplain District, whose lowest structural
member is one foot above BFE in A Zones and two feet above BFE in V
Zones.[Amended 5-22-2014 by Order No. 2014-126]
FEMA — Federal Emergency Management Agency.
FEMA FLOOD ZONES — Geographic areas susceptible to inundation by
water that FEMA has mapped according to varying levels of flood risk, as
defined and delineated on a community's Flood Insurance Rate Map, as may
be amended from time to time.
FIRM — Flood Insurance Rate Map.
GRADE — The referenced plane as of November 6, 2009, representing
the ground elevation adjoining the proposed building at all exterior walls.
Where the ground level slopes away from the exterior walls, the reference
plane shall be established by the lowest points within the area between the
building and a point six feet from the building, or between the building and
the lot line, whichever point is closer. Retaining walls for mounded septic
systems mandated by the Board of Health are not included in the calculation
of grade.
GROSS FLOOR AREA — The sum of all floor areas within a building or
structure, measured from the perimeter of the outside walls of the building
under consideration, without deduction for hallways, stairs, closets,
thickness of walls, columns, or other features. It shall include all areas
capable of being used for human occupancy, including all basement floor
areas, mezzanine and attic space and enclosed porches.
HALF STORY — That space above the plate line but below the ridgeline
in an area commonly called the "attic space," provided that the gross
floor area of the half story shall not exceed 66% of the gross floor area
immediately below the half story.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE — A surface which prevents the penetration of
precipitation or other liquids into the ground, including roofs, concrete,
asphalt, sidewalks, etc. Any area designed for vehicle use or vehicle parking
covered with porous pavers, which may become impervious over time may,
§ 240-131.3 WASTEWATER DISCHARGE § 240-131.3
232:607
at the discretion of the Building Commissioner, be considered impervious
surface.
LOT AREA — For the purpose of determining maximum building coverage
and maximum lot coverage allowances, the lot area for legally created lots
that are vacant or developed and/or improved as of November 6, 2009, shall
be the horizontal area of the lot defined by metes and bounds. All of the lot
area used for zoning compliance shall be land other than that under water
nine months or more in a normal year.
LOT COVERAGE — The percentage of a lot covered by impervious surfaces.
For the purposes of §§ 240-131 through 240-131.8, paved driveways and
parking areas, principal and accessory structures, and other on-site
amenities that render any portion of a lot impervious shall be included in
the calculation of lot coverage.
NONPROFIT EDUCATIONAL USE — An educational use conducted by a
not-for-profit corporation whose articles of incorporation permit it to
engage in educational activities and educational purposes as its principal
permitted use within the meaning of MGL c. 40A, § 3, including but not
limited to libraries and museums.
OPEN FOUNDATION — A pile or column foundation designed for structures
in flood zones that minimizes the foundation area subject to lateral flood
loads. Open foundations are intended to prevent flotation, collapse, and
lateral movement of a building during a flood event.
RELIGIOUS INSTITUTION — An institution engaged in religious purposes
within the meaning of MGL c. 40A, § 3.
SEASONAL USE — A use carried on for only a part of the year. Typical
seasonal uses are outdoor recreational activities such as swimming and
boating, both motorized and nonmotorized; impermanent use of cottages,
motels, hotels, letting of rooms in a residential structure and letting an
entire residential structure.
SEASONAL USE STRUCTURE — Any structure designed or used as
temporary seasonal living quarters that is not used as a primary, permanent
residence. Seasonal use structures may have heat and other amenities but
do not deposit wastewater into wastewater treatment systems on a regular
year-round basis and do not withdraw water for consumption or other
activities on a regular year-round basis.
SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENCE — A detached residential building designed
for and occupied by a single family.
SMALL-SCALE FOOD SERVICE — An establishment legally in existence at
the time of the adoption of §§ 240-131 through 240-131.8, where food is
served to customers by wait staff. Small-scale food service does not include
restaurants designed to serve a large volume of customers. Small-scale food
service is subject to formula business limitations as described herein. These
uses are intended to increase pedestrian activity.
§ 240-131.3 BARNSTABLE CODE § 240-131.3
232:608
SPECIAL PERMIT GRANTING AUTHORITY (SPGA) — The Zoning Board of
Appeals shall be the special permit granting authority within the Craigville
Beach District.
STORY — The vertical distance from top to top of two successive tiers of
beams or finished floor surfaces; and, for the topmost story, from the top of
the floor finish to the top of the ceiling joists or, where there is not a ceiling,
to the top of the roof rafters.
STRUCTURE — Anything constructed or erected on the ground or which is
attached to something located on the ground. Structures include buildings,
sheds, swimming pools and towers, but shall exclude fences of six feet or
less in height and flagpoles.
UPLAND — All lands not defined herein as wetlands.
V (VELOCITY) ZONE — The area extending from mean low water to the
inland limit one-hundred-year floodplain supporting waves greater than
three feet in height. V-zones are mapped on the FEMA FIRM.
WETLAND — The land under the ocean or under any bay, lake, pond, river,
stream, creek or estuary; any wet meadows, marshes, swamps, bogs, areas
where high groundwater, flowing or standing surface water or ice provide
a significant part of the supporting substrata for a plant community for at
least five months of the year, lowland subject to any tidal action or annual
storm flooding or flowage, or any flat, beach, dune, or other shifting sand
formation.
§ 240-131.4. Craigville Beach District use regulations. [Adopted
1-19-2011 by Ord. No. 11-01 of the Barnstable County Assembly of
Delegates pursuant to Ch. 716 of the Acts of 1989 (Cape Cod
Commission Act)]
Municipal uses are exempt from these regulations. For principal permitted
uses, see § 240-131.7 (Neighborhood Overlay regulations) herein.
Use limitations.
(1) Any use not expressly allowed herein is prohibited.
The conversion of any building or structure from seasonal use to
year-round use is prohibited, except that single-family residences
are not subject to this use limitation. The conversion of a building,
or buildings, constituting a cottage colony, hotel, inn or rooming
house, or of a facility required to be licensed as a recreational
camp, overnight camp or cabin, or motel under MGL c. 140, §§ 32A
to 32I, to condominium-type ownership, shall be deemed to be a
change in use from seasonal to year-round use and is prohibited.
(2)
Permitted business and retail uses shall not include a business
which is required by contractual or other arrangement to maintain
one or more of the following items: standardized (formula) array
of services and/or merchandise, trademark, logo, service mark,
symbol, decor, architecture, layout, uniform, or similar
(3)
A.
§ 240-131.3 WASTEWATER DISCHARGE § 240-131.4
232:609
standardized features and which causes it to be substantially
identical to more than 14 other businesses regardless of ownership
or location. Drive-up windows and/or drive-through facilities are
prohibited.
Exempt uses.
Religious institutions, accessory day-care centers, and nonprofit
educational uses are permitted as exempt uses within the Craigville
Beach District. These uses shall, however, be subject to and in
conformance with the reasonable bulk, density, design and
development regulations of the Craigville Beach District as set
forth in § 240-131.1, Purposes and intent, § 240-131.5,
Dimensional, bulk and other regulations, § 240-131.7,
Neighborhood Overlay regulations, including general performance
standards and applicable neighborhood performance standards.
(1)
Where the exempt use does not comply with said regulations,
the Zoning Board of Appeals shall, by modification permit, modify
said regulations if compliance with the regulation substantially
diminishes or detracts from the usefulness of a proposed
development or impairs the character of the development so as to
affect its intended use; provided, however, that the relief granted
will not create a public safety hazard along adjacent roadways and
will not adversely impact natural resources or create a nuisance
or adverse impacts to other surrounding properties. A modification
permit shall be subject to the same procedural requirements as a
special permit, except that approval of a modification permit shall
require a simple majority of the members of the Board.
(2)
B.
Continuation. Any lawfully established lot, structure or use existing at
the time of the adoption of §§ 240-131 through 240-131.8 that does not
conform to the provisions of the CBD shall be allowed to continue.
C.
Change, expansion or alteration of uses and structures. Changes,
expansions, or alterations of existing conforming or nonconforming
uses and structures lawfully existing are permitted subject to the
following:
As of right.
The normal and customary repair and maintenance of a
building or structure and the conversion of existing floor area
to habitable space consistent with Board of Health and other
regulations is permitted as of right.
(a)
The alteration and expansion of a building or structure is
permitted as of right, provided that the alteration or expansion
shall conform to following criteria:
Conforms to applicable height and setback requirements
of § 240-131.5B, § 240-131.5A notwithstanding.
[1]
(b)
(1)
D.
§ 240-131.4 BARNSTABLE CODE § 240-131.4
232:610
Does not exceed the coverage limitations set forth in
§ 240-131.6.
[2]
Complies with applicable general and neighborhood
performance standards.
[3]
By special permit.
The alteration or expansion of an existing conforming or
nonconforming lawfully established building or structure in
lawful existence at the time of adoption of §§ 240-131 through
240-131.8 that does not qualify under the as-of-right provisions
above shall be permitted only by a special permit from the
SPGA. In granting such special permit, the SPGA shall find that
the proposed alterations and/or expansions:
Are not substantially more detrimental to the environment,
community and/or historic character of the neighborhood
than the existing building or structure.
[1]
Comply with § 240-131.1, Purposes and intent, and with
the performance standards and design guidelines for the
neighborhood overlay area in which the development is
located, in accordance with § 240-131.7, Neighborhood
District Overlay regulations, with the exception of the
dimensional requirements of § 240-131.7D(1).
[2]
Do not entail an increase in gross floor area or footprint
for voluntary demolition of a single-family residence.
[3]
Do not exceed 25% of the gross floor area of structures in
existence as of July 1, 1989, or do not exceed 10% of the
gross floor area of structures in existence as of November
6, 2009.
[4]
Do not increase lot coverage over what is allowed under
§ 240-131.6, Coverage limitations, or by more than 10%
over what was existing on November 6, 2009, whichever is
greater.
[5]
[6] Do not increase flood hazards in the neighborhood.
Maintain or enhance views to Nantucket Sound and/or
the Centerville River where applicable in accordance with
§ 240-131.5, Note 4.
[7]
In V Zones, do not increase south-facing building surfaces
so as to limit the adverse effect of increasing elevation
or velocity of floodwaters due to a change in flowage
characteristics on the subject site, adjacent properties, or
any public or private way.
[8]
(a)
(2)
§ 240-131.4 WASTEWATER DISCHARGE § 240-131.4
232:611
Special permit for dimensional relief. The SPGA may provide relief from
minimum yard setbacks when such relief ensures that the proposed
development:
(1) Is consistent with § 240-131.1, Purposes and intent;
Is consistent with the performance standards for the neighborhood
district where the development is located in accordance with
§ 240-131.7, Neighborhood Overlay regulations; and
(2)
(3) The applicant demonstrates undue hardship without desired relief.
E.
Reestablishment of damaged or destroyed use, building or structure.
The reestablishment of a lawfully established conforming or
nonconforming use and/or building or structure which has been
destroyed or damaged by fire, acts of nature or other catastrophe
shall be permitted as of right, provided that the Building
Commissioner has determined that all the following conditions are
met:
The reconstruction or repair will not materially increase the
gross floor area or height of the building or structure beyond
that which previously existed, nor materially increase the
footprint of the structure; or materially change the grade other
than grades required for installation or upgrade of on-site
septic systems; except that buildings in the floodplain that
existed prior to November 6, 2009, may be elevated two feet
above BFE or as required by the applicable law regardless
of the resulting building height, provided that the building
complied with building height regulations at the time of its
construction.
(a)
If the building's location on the lot is to be changed, it will
change in a manner that will be closer to complying with
the dimensional and bulk regulations and with performance
standards regarding building orientation.
(b)
The reconstruction or repair will not constitute an expansion
or intensification of any use.
(c)
In the case of any use in which it would otherwise be required,
the site plan review process has been followed.
(d)
Design and architecture of damaged or destroyed buildings
and structures in existence at the time of the adoption of this
regulation may be replicated. If the Building Commissioner
finds that the structure is to be rebuilt to replicate what existed
before the damage or destruction, the design guidelines in
this chapter do not apply. If the structure is in the floodplain,
any design or architectural changes associated solely with
(e)
(1)
F.
§ 240-131.4 BARNSTABLE CODE § 240-131.4
232:612
§ 240-131.5. Dimensional, bulk, and other requirements. [Adopted
1-19-2011 by Ord. No. 11-01 of the Barnstable County Assembly of
Delegates pursuant to Ch. 716 of the Acts of 1989 (Cape Cod
Commission Act)]
The following requirements apply to all development and redevelopment in
the Craigville Beach Zoning District:
floodproofing the reconstructed structure shall not require
compliance with the design guidelines.
Any previously established use or structure which no longer
complies with the provisions of the CBD shall be discontinued
unless a building permit has been applied for within two years from
the date of damage or destruction, and construction is continuously
pursued to completion.
(2)
Voluntary demolition and reconstruction of single-family residences.
Lawfully established single-family residences may be demolished and
reconstructed in accordance with § 240-131.4F.
G.
For all legally created vacant lots, the frontage and area in existence
as of November 6, 2009, and/or legally developed lots that were in
existence as of November 6, 2009, and conformed to the existing zoning
when legally created, the existing lot area, lot frontage, front, side and
rear setbacks and building height dimensions may be used in lieu of
the following dimensional requirements in § 240-131.5B, except where
stated otherwise.
A.
Requirements table.
Neighborhood Overlays
Requirements
Village
Craigville
Craigville
Beach
Long
Beach/
Short
Beach
Centerville
River
North
Bank
Minimum lot area
(square feet)
87,120 87,120 87,120 87,120
Minimum lot frontage
(feet)
75 100 125 125
Minimum Front yard
setback (feet)
15 20 20 20
Minimum Side yard
setback (feet)
10 15 154 15
Minimum Rear yard
setback (feet)
10 15 15 15
Maximum building
height1,2,3
30 26 30 30
B.
§ 240-131.4 WASTEWATER DISCHARGE § 240-131.5
232:613
Neighborhood Overlays
Requirements
Village
Craigville
Craigville
Beach
Long
Beach/
Short
Beach
Centerville
River
North
Bank
Maximum number of
stories3
2 2 2 2
Maximum building
coverage
See § 240-131.6.
Maximum lot
coverage
See § 240-131.6.
Dimensional Table Notes:
1 Maximum building height allowances vary depending upon the roof
pitch of the structure, with gable roofs having a slope of 7/12 or
greater allowed the maximum building height; hip and other sloped
roofs with a slope of 4/12 or greater are allowed five feet less than
the maximum building height; and flat roofs prohibited except on onestory
additions totaling less than 300 square feet per parcel. For the
purposes of determining building height, no more than 50% of the roof
slope used in the calculation may be altered by dormers and other roof
changes.
2 Buildings in the floodplain that existed prior to November 6, 2009,
may be elevated two feet above BFE or as required by the applicable
law, provided that the building complied with building height
regulations at the time of its construction.
3 The second story must be set back at least two feet from the facade
line of the floor below on two of the building's facades, and the second
story floor area shall not exceed 80% area of the floor area
immediately below it.
4 In the Long Beach/Short Beach Neighborhood, to preserve and
enhance views of Craigville Beach and the Centerville River, a view
corridor shall be preserved using 20 feet of either side setback or,
where side yard setbacks are less than 20 feet, the greater of either
side yard setback existing on November 6, 2009. The view corridor
shall remain free of view-obstructing buildings, structures, site
improvements or landscaping other than low-growing plant material or
existing natural vegetation for the entire depth of the property from
the street to the river or beach.
§ 240-131.5 BARNSTABLE CODE § 240-131.6
232:614
§ 240-131.6. Coverage limitations. [Adopted 1-19-2011 by Ord. No.
11-01 of the Barnstable County Assembly of Delegates pursuant to
Ch. 716 of the Acts of 1989 (Cape Cod Commission Act)]
The following limitations apply to all development and redevelopment in the
Craigville Beach Zoning District.
Lot Size
(square feet)
Maximum Building
Coverage (Footprint)
Allowance
(square feet)
Maximum Lot Coverage
Allowance
1,300 to 4,999 1,100, plus 10.8% of lot
area over 1,300
50%
5,000 to 7,499 1,500, plus 6% of lot area
over 5,000
50%, but no more than 3,200
square feet
7,500 to 9,999 1,650, plus 6% of lot area
over 7,500
3,200 square feet
10,000 to
14,999
1,800, plus 4% of lot area
over 10,000
3,300 square feet
15,000 to
19,999
2,000, plus 6% of lot area
over 15,000
3,400 square feet
20,000 to
34,999
2,300, plus 4% of lot area
over 20,000
3,600 square feet
35,000 to
44,999
2,900, plus 4% of lot area
over 35,000
3,600 square feet or 10%,
whichever is greater
45,000 and
above
3,300, plus 3% of lot area
over 45,000
10%
§ 240-131.7. Neighborhood Overlay regulations. [Adopted
1-19-2011 by Ord. No. 11-01 of the Barnstable County Assembly of
Delegates pursuant to Ch. 716 of the Acts of 1989 (Cape Cod
Commission Act)]
Purpose. The Neighborhood Overlay regulations establish uses,
dimensional requirements and design guidelines to preserve the
distinctive character; allow continued use and enjoyment of properties
and structures; make provisions for changes and expansions; protect
and preserve scenic views and vistas; protect and improve natural
resources; and limit damage from periodic flood events for each
neighborhood within the Craigville Beach District.
A.
Historic and community character. These regulations will ensure that
development and redevelopment in the CBD contribute to and do not
detract from the historic character of the Craigville Beach area; that
any proposed additions to historic structures shall be consistent with
the historic structure and shall be consistent with the character of the
surrounding neighborhood, including elements such as building height,
B.
§ 240-131.6 WASTEWATER DISCHARGE § 240-131.7
232:615
mass and orientation; and preserve views and ways to the water from
public spaces, streets and ways.
Applicability. Development and redevelopment shall be subject to the
following additional requirements and regulations based upon the
applicable Neighborhood Overlay.
C.
General performance standards.
The development complies with the setbacks and lot coverage
requirements set forth herein, and is in character with surrounding
structures, particularly structures that predate it unless relief has
been granted by the SPGA in accordance with § 240-131.4D and E.
(1)
The development complies with the height limitations set forth
herein.
(2)
Exposed foundation walls for raised septic systems and/or elevated
structures are prohibited; foundation walls shall be screened
through the use of foundation plantings and/or the use of other
natural materials.
(3)
Stormwater management and erosion control for nonresidential
uses comply with best management practices through low-impact
development or other adaptive management practice.
(4)
Up to 50 square feet of roof deck may be allowed atop the first
or second floor of a structure if the railing and support structure
for the roof deck are constructed fully below the tallest part of the
roofline they are contained within.
(5)
All new non-water-dependent development shall be set back at
least 50 feet from the top of the coastal bank resource area.
Change, alteration, or expansion of existing structures shall not be
sited closer to the top of the coastal bank resource area than the
existing development to the maximum extent feasible.
(6)
Existing natural vegetation within the fifty-foot buffer area to salt
marsh and undisturbed buffer areas 50 feet landward of the mean
high-water mark of coastal water bodies shall be preserved to the
maximum extent feasible.
(7)
No direct untreated stormwater discharges shall be permitted into
any coastal waters or wetlands, including discharges above or
below the mean high water level. Stormwater discharge shall be
located and treated the farthest practicable distance from wetlands
and water bodies and shall be located a minimum of 50 feet from
wetlands or water bodies.
(8)
D.
E. Long Beach/Short Beach Neighborhood.
§ 240-131.7 BARNSTABLE CODE § 240-131.7
232:616
Permitted principal uses: The following principal uses are
permitted in the Long Beach/Short Beach Neighborhood Overlay
area subject to the performance standards listed below.
(a) Single-family residence.
(1)
Permitted accessory uses: Customary and incidental uses and
structures are permitted in the Long Beach/Short Beach
Neighborhood Overlay area subject to the use limitations and
performance standards listed in § 240-131.7D.
(2)
Neighborhood performance standards. All development and
redevelopment shall meet the following standards:
No development or redevelopment shall be permitted within
V Zones, except that existing structures may be changed or
altered, provided that there is no increase in gross floor area,
footprint, or intensity of use (including but not limited to
increases in wastewater flow and impervious area) within the
V Zone. This provision shall not be construed to include duly
permitted docks and piers.
(a)
New septic systems shall be prohibited in V Zones except to
upgrade existing failed systems where such systems pose a
demonstrated threat to public health, water quality, or natural
resources.
(b)
Any activity or development in a V Zone that creates an
adverse effect by increasing elevation or velocity of
floodwaters due to a change in drainage or flowage
characteristics on the subject site, adjacent properties or any
public or private way is prohibited. Any proposed activity shall
not result in flood damage due to filling which causes lateral
displacement of floodwaters that, in the judgment of the SPGA,
would otherwise be confined to said area. The burden of proof
for this standard rests with the applicant and shall require
certification by a professional engineer.
(c)
Open foundations shall be designed to accommodate only the
height required to elevate the lowest structural member two
feet above the BFE in V Zones and one foot above BFE in A
Zones. For all new construction and substantial improvements
within the V Zones, the space below the lowest floor must
either be free of obstruction or constructed with
nonsupporting breakaway walls, open wood lattice-work, or
insect screening intended to collapse under wind and water
loads without causing collapse, displacement, or other
structural damage to the elevated portion of the building or
supporting foundation system.
(d)
(3)
F. Craigville Beach Neighborhood.
§ 240-131.7 WASTEWATER DISCHARGE § 240-131.7
232:617
Permitted principal uses. The following principal uses are
permitted in the Craigville Beach Neighborhood Overlay area
subject to the performance standards listed below.
(a) Single-family residence.
(b) Small-scale food service.
(c) Beach club.
(d) Cottage colony.
Hotel or motel in existence as of July 16, 2008, that is lawfully
established.
(e)
(1)
Permitted accessory uses. Customary and incidental uses and
structures are permitted in the Craigville Beach Neighborhood
Overlay area subject to the use limitations and performance
standards listed in § 240-131.7D.
(2)
Neighborhood performance standards. All development and
redevelopment shall meet the following standards:
No development or redevelopment shall be permitted within
V Zones, except that existing structures may be changed or
altered, provided there is no increase in gross floor area,
footprint, or intensity of use (including but not limited to
increases in wastewater flow and impervious area) within the
V Zone.
(a)
New septic systems shall be prohibited in V Zones except to
upgrade existing failed systems where such systems pose a
demonstrated threat to public health, water quality, or natural
resources.
(b)
Any activity or development in a V Zone that creates an
adverse effect by increasing elevation or velocity of
floodwaters due to a change in drainage or flowage
characteristics on the subject site, adjacent properties or any
public or private way is prohibited. A proposed activity shall
not result in flood damage due to filling which causes lateral
displacement of floodwaters that, in the judgment of the SPGA,
would otherwise be confined to said area. The burden of proof
for this standard rests with the applicant and shall require
certification by a professional engineer.
(c)
Open foundations shall be designed to accommodate only the
height required to elevate the lowest structural member two
feet above the BFE in V Zones and one foot above BFE in A
Zones. For all new construction and substantial improvements
within the V Zones, the space below the lowest floor must
either be free of obstruction or constructed with
nonsupporting breakaway walls, open wood lattice-work, or
(d)
(3)
§ 240-131.7 BARNSTABLE CODE § 240-131.7
232:618
insect screening intended to collapse under wind and water
loads without causing collapse, displacement, or other
structural damage to the elevated portion of the building or
supporting foundation system.
Beach club design guidelines.
Purpose: to maintain public views to the water and to maintain
the neighborhood's existing character with small-scale
building masses and natural or traditional building materials.
(a)
Building height and massing. New construction on beach club
properties shall have modest massings to relate to the small
scale of most structures in the beachfront neighborhood. Any
structure with a footprint of 3,000 square feet or more shall
incorporate significant changes in massing to break up the
facade and should integrate one-story massings into the design
to relate the building to the surrounding smaller structures.
(b)
Building orientation. Buildings shall be oriented with the
narrow end facing the street and the water to maximize public
views of the water across the site. New buildings or complexes
should not extend over more than 150 feet of the lot frontage,
and efforts should be made to limit the expansion of existing
buildings.
(c)
Maintaining views to water. Multiple buildings on one lot
should be clustered close together to limit obstructed views of
the water, or shall be separated from each other by 100 feet
or more of road frontage to allow broad unobstructed views
across the lot to the water.
(d)
Fences. Fences shall be of open construction and low profile
(such as split rail and low picket fencing) to maintain public
views to the water. Fences over three feet in height should
be limited to screening loading and delivery areas adjacent to
buildings, or modest trash collection areas. Screening fences
should not extend farther than necessary beyond the building
footprint to maintain public views.
(e)
Building materials. Exterior building materials shall be those
traditionally used in the region or other naturally weathering
materials, such as wood shingle, wood clapboard, or board and
batten siding.
(f)
(4)
Centerville River North Bank Neighborhood.
Permitted principal uses. The following principal uses are
permitted in the Centerville River North Bank Neighborhood
Overlay area subject to the performance standards listed below:
(a) Single-family residence.
(1)
G.
§ 240-131.7 WASTEWATER DISCHARGE § 240-131.7
232:619
Permitted accessory uses. Customary and incidental uses and
structures are permitted in the Centerville River North
Neighborhood Overlay area subject to the use limitations and
performance standards listed in § 240-131.7D.
(2)
Neighborhood performance standards. All development and
redevelopment shall meet the following standards:
Tree removal or vista pruning shall not interrupt the treeline
as viewed from the south looking northward to the treeline.
(a)
No development or redevelopment shall be permitted within
V Zones, except that existing structures may be changed or
altered, provided that there is no increase in gross floor area,
footprint, or intensity of use (including but not limited to
increases in wastewater flow and impervious area) within the
V Zone.
(b)
Any activity or development in a V Zone that creates an
adverse effect by increasing elevation or velocity of
floodwaters due to a change in drainage or flowage
characteristics on the subject site, adjacent properties or any
public or private way is prohibited. A proposed activity shall
not result in flood damage due to filling which causes lateral
displacement of floodwaters that, in the judgment of the SPGA,
would otherwise be confined to said area. The burden of proof
for this standard rests with the applicant and shall require
certification by a professional engineer.
(c)
Open foundations shall be designed to accommodate only the
height required to elevate the lowest structural member two
feet above the BFE in V Zones and one foot above BFE in A
Zones. For all new construction and substantial improvements
within the V Zones, the space below the lowest floor must
either be free of obstruction or constructed with
nonsupporting breakaway walls, open wood lattice-work, or
insect screening intended to collapse under wind and water
loads without causing collapse, displacement, or other
structural damage to the elevated portion of the building or
supporting foundation system.
(d)
(3)
Craigville Village Neighborhood.
Permitted principal uses. The following principal uses are
permitted in the Craigville Village Neighborhood Overlay area
subject to the performance standards listed below.
(a) Single-family residence.
(b) Conference center.
(1)
H.
§ 240-131.7 BARNSTABLE CODE § 240-131.7
232:620
Permitted accessory uses. Customary and incidental uses and
structures are permitted in the Craigville Village Neighborhood
Overlay area subject to the use limitations and performance
standards listed in § 240-131.7D.
(2)
Neighborhood performance standards. All development and
redevelopment shall meet the following design guidelines:
Purpose. Most buildings in the Craigville Village Neighborhood
date from the late 1800s and early 1900s when the
neighborhood developed as a Christian Camp Meeting
Association. The neighborhood is still defined by its historic
structures and their configuration around a central green,
small street grid, and communal paths.
(a)
Objectives.
To preserve the character-defining features of the original
camp meeting neighborhood, including its small lots,
modest-scale structures, and orientation of buildings to
public areas.
[1]
To ensure that additions and alterations to structures are
compatible with the existing scale and character of the
building and preserve the original massing and unique
architectural features of its historic buildings.
[2]
(b)
Application. The design guidelines set forth herein do not apply
to structures in existence as of the date of the adoption of
§§ 240-131 through 240-131.8, but shall apply to all new
development, to any additions to existing structures, and to
all reconstruction projects except as provided for in
§ 240-131.4F(1)(e).
(c)
Building design. The guidelines shall apply to construction
of new structures and expansions and alterations of existing
structures.
Preserve the original massing of historic structures
(pre-1945).
[1]
Additions should be attached to secondary or less
prominent facades of the building (the side or rear
facades), and should be stepped back from the front and
rear corners of the building so as to preserve the original
massing of the structure, including its roof form.
[2]
Work with modest massings. Additions should be scaled to
be consistent with or smaller than the size of the original
historic structure, following the neighborhood tradition
of expanding small cottages incrementally with modest
additions. Additions should generally have a lower roofline
[3]
(d)
(3)
§ 240-131.7 WASTEWATER DISCHARGE § 240-131.7
232:621
§ 240-131.8. Additional provisions. [Adopted 1-19-2011 by Ord. No.
11-01 of the Barnstable County Assembly of Delegates pursuant to
Ch. 716 of the Acts of 1989 (Cape Cod Commission Act)]
than the original structure to maintain the prominence
of the original building, though some additions may be
slightly taller than the original structure if attached to the
original structure with a smaller connecting mass.
Roof forms. The roof pitch on new construction and
additions should complement the roof pitch of the original
historic structure and should maintain a pitch of at least
six over 12.
[4]
Retain original architectural details and unique forms.
Additions should be placed so as to limit the removal of
distinctive architectural trim and features that are unique
to the building. Additions and alterations should not
interfere with character-defining features, such as open
porches, steeply pitched roof forms, unique windows, and
carpenter gothic trim along eaves and entries. Siding
materials used on the original structure should be
retained, though other regional siding materials may be
appropriate on additions.
[5]
Other regulations. The following provisions of the Barnstable Code are
hereby incorporated into this regulation: § 240-7, Application of district
regulations; § 240-9C and D; § 240-10, Prohibited uses; § 240-34,
Floodplain District; § 240-43, Accessory uses; § 240-46A and B, Home
occupations; Article VI, Off-Street Parking, §§ 240-52, 240-53B through
F, as delimited only in the Craigville Beach neighborhood; and sign
regulations, §§ 240-59 through 240-63; Article XI, Growth Management,
§§ 240-110 through 240-122; Article IX, Site Plan Review; Article XIII,
Administration and Enforcement §§ 240-123 and 240-124; and
§ 240-125C, Special permit provisions, as these provisions of the
Barnstable Code cited in this section may be amended from time to
time. [Amended 5-22-2014 by Order No. 2014-126]
A.
Conflicts. Unless otherwise stated, the requirements of the Craigville
Beach District shall apply to uses and structures within the Craigville
Beach District. In the event of a conflict, these regulations shall apply.
B.
Severability. The provisions of §§ 240-131 through 240-131.8 are
severable. If any court of competent jurisdiction shall invalidate any
provision herein, such invalidation shall not affect any other provisions
of this chapter. If any court of competent jurisdiction shall invalidate
the application of any provision of this chapter to a particular case,
such invalidation shall not affect the application of said provision to any
other case within the Town.
C.
§ 240-131.7 BARNSTABLE CODE § 240-131.8
232:622
Part II: Appendix to the General Ordinances
Chapter 241
ADMINISTRATIVE CODE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Administrative procedures — See Part V of
the Charter.
Appointments Committee — See Ch. 37, Art. I.
Funds — See Ch. 86.
Tree Warden — See Ch. 138, Art. I.
Manager's administrative procedures — See
Ch. 401.
Personnel — See Ch. 242.
§ 240-131.8 WASTEWATER DISCHARGE § 240-131.8
232:623

ARTICLE I
Preamble
§ 241-1. Purpose; description of Administrative Code organization.
The Administrative Code of the Town of Barnstable has the broad
purpose of providing for the internal organization and administration
of the Barnstable Town government. The intention and purpose of
this code is to provide for a legal, practical, and efficient plan of
organization and administrative procedures which allows for and
encourages the effective delivery of municipal services to the residents
of Barnstable.
A.
The Administrative Code is composed of four parts, the purpose of
which is to detail the various responsibilities, authorities, and methods
of administering municipal agency services. The parts describe the
elective organization, the multiple-member appointive organization, the
administrative organization, and the administrative procedures of the
Town. A brief description of each part follows:
Elective organization: This describes all elective officers of the
Town, their manner and time of election, term of office, authorities,
responsibilities and interrelationship with the other sections of
the organization. It is based largely upon the provisions of the
Barnstable Town Charter.
(1)
Multiple-member appointive organization: This describes all
multiple-member body appointments made by the Town Council,
and further delineates manner and time of appointment and terms
of appointment generally, and authorities, responsibilities and
interrelationships with the other sections of the organization.
(2)
Administrative organization: This describes all of the
administrative agencies of the Town under the jurisdiction of the
Town Manager. It further delineates the mission and functions
of each said agency, the authorities, responsibilities and
interrelationships amongst and between the administrative
agencies, the multiple-member bodies, and the elective
organization.
(3)
Administrative procedures: This describes all legislative,
administrative, and adjudicatory procedures of the Town. This part
establishes procedures by which municipal legislation is developed,
introduced, and approved before the Town Council and by which
rules and regulations are adopted by Town administrative agencies.
It specifies the manner in which all the entities of the Town function
administratively, through the promulgation of policies and
procedures. It delineates the method and manner in which
adjudicatory proceedings are to be conducted by the various Town
agencies and officials who have the responsibility of deciding
individual cases.
(4)
B.
§ 241-1 WASTEWATER DISCHARGE § 241-1
232:625

ARTICLE II
Elective Organization
§ 241-2. Offices and standards.
Generally. In addition to the Barnstable Town Council, the offices to be
filled by the voters shall be a School Committee, a Town Clerk, a Town
Collector and a Housing Authority and such other regional authorities,
districts, or committees as may be established by law or interlocal
agreement.
A.
Eligibility for office. Any voter shall be eligible to hold any elective Town
office, provided that no person shall simultaneously hold more than one
elective Town office.
B.
Town elections. A preliminary election is held for the nomination of
candidates on the seventh Tuesday preceding every regular Town
election. The regular Town election is held on the first Tuesday
following the first Monday in November of each odd-numbered year.
C.
Term of office. The term of office of all elective Town officers shall
be four years beginning on the second Monday following election and
continuing until their successors are qualified. Terms of office of Town
Councilors shall be so arranged that the terms of as nearly half of the
Councilors as may be shall expire at each biennial Town election. To
accomplish this, odd-numbered precincts and even-numbered precincts
shall expire in alternating election years. Terms of office for the five
members of the School Committee and the four elective members
of the Housing Authority shall be so arranged that the terms of as
nearly an equal number of members as is possible shall expire at each
regular election. The fifth member of the Housing Authority shall be
appointed by the Secretary of Communities and Development of the
commonwealth. [Amended 9-8-2005 by Order No. 2005-126]
D.
Filling of vacancies.
Town Clerk and Town Collector: If a vacancy occurs in the office
of Town Clerk or Town Collector either by failure to elect or
otherwise, the Town Council shall, within 30 days following the
date such vacancy is declared to exist, act to fill the vacancy. The
Town Council shall choose from among the voters a person to serve
for the balance of the unexpired term. Any person so chosen shall
be sworn and commence to serve forthwith.
(1)
School Committee and Housing Authority: If a vacancy occurs in
the membership of the School Committee or Housing Authority
either by failure to elect or otherwise, the President of the Town
Council shall, within 30 days following the date such vacancy is
declared to exist, call a joint meeting of the Town Council and the
remaining membership of whichever agency in which a vacancy is
declared to exist, to act to fill the vacancy. At any such joint meeting
(2)
E.
§ 241-2 WASTEWATER DISCHARGE § 241-2
232:627
§ 241-3. The Barnstable Town Council.
a majority of those present and voting shall choose, from among
the voters, a person to serve for the balance of the unexpired
term. Participants in such joint meeting to fill a vacancy in the
School Committee or Housing Authority shall give consideration
to whichever of the defeated candidates for the seat in which the
vacancy is declared to exist who received the highest number of
votes at the last regular Town election immediately preceding the
date the vacancy is declared to exist. Any person so chosen shall be
sworn and commence to serve forthwith.
Annual reports. All elective offices of the Town of Barnstable shall
prepare annual reports of their activities and submit same to the Town
Manager for inclusion in the Annual Report of the Town, on or before
the fourth Friday in January. The annual report shall describe calendaryear
activities for the year ending each December 31. Where required
by state and/or federal regulations, certain elective offices shall be
required to submit copies of their annual reports to appropriate state
and/or federal agencies.
F.
Composition and authority. There shall be 13 members of the
Barnstable Town Council, one Councilor elected from each precinct.
The Barnstable Town Council shall exercise all of the legislative powers
of the Town. [Amended 9-28-1993 by Order No. 93-130; 9-8-2005
by Order No. 2005-126]
A.
Eligibility. Only voters of the Town of Barnstable, who at all times
during their term of office shall be and remain residents of the Town
shall be eligible to hold the office of Councilor. A member of the Town
Council who moves from one precinct to another during the term for
which the Councilor was elected shall cease to be a member of the
Town Council; provided, however, that a Councilor with six months
or less remaining on the term for which the Councilor was elected,
notwithstanding removal from one precinct to another, shall continue
to serve and to perform all official duties during the term of office.
B.
Council organization. After the Councilors-elect have been sworn, the
Town Council shall be called together by the Council President for
the purpose of conducting an election in December among Council
members for the office of Town Council President and Vice President
to serve at the pleasure of the Town Council. In nonelection years, the
Town Council shall conduct a reorganization election each December.
The President presides at all meetings of the Town Council, and
performs such other functions as may be assigned by the Barnstable
Town Charter, by ordinance or by vote of the Town Council. The Vice
President presides at meetings of the Town Council during the absence
or disability of the President.
C.
General powers and duties. Except as otherwise provided by law or by
the Barnstable Town Charter, specifically Section 1-4 (Powers of the
D.
§ 241-2 BARNSTABLE CODE § 241-3
232:628
§ 241-4. The Barnstable School Committee.
Town), Section 1-5 (Interpretation of Powers), and Section 2-3 (General
Powers and Duties), all powers of the Town of Barnstable shall be
vested in the Town Council which shall provide for their exercise and
for the performance of all duties and obligation imposed on the Town
by law.
Filling of Town Council vacancies. If a vacancy in the office of Councilor
occurs during the first 44 months of a term, it shall be filled by a
precinct election. If a regular Town election is scheduled to be held
within 120 days, but more than 50 days, after the date vacancy occurs,
it shall be filled by a special election within that regular election;
otherwise, the Council shall schedule a special election to be held as
soon as is practical to fill the vacancy for the balance of the unexpired
term. The provisions of the Charter governing regular elections shall,
so far as they are apt, apply to said special election, provided no
preliminary election shall be held.79 [Amended 9-23-2003 by Order
No. 93-130]
E.
Exercise of powers. Except as otherwise provided by the laws of the
commonwealth or the Barnstable Town Charter, the legislative powers
of the Town Council may be exercised in a manner determined by the
Town Council.
F.
Interrelationships. The Barnstable Town Council interacts with all
elective officers of the Town, all multiple-member appointive boards,
and the administrative organization of the Town. A description of said
interactions appears as part of the Administrative Code under each
appropriate part and section that describe the officers and agencies of
the Town.
G.
Composition. There shall be a School Committee composed of five
members elected by and from the voters at large.
A.
Powers and duties. The Barnstable School Committee shall have
general charge and superintendence of the public schools for the
purpose of educating children in the Town. The powers of the School
Committee shall include, but need not be limited to: appoint a
superintendent of schools, and all other officers and employees
associated with the school, fix their compensation, define their duties
and discharge them; make all reasonable rules and regulations,
consistent with law, for the administration and management of the
public schools of the Town. The School Committee shall have all the
powers and duties given to school committees by the laws of the
commonwealth in particular Chapters 70, 71, 72, 74, and 76, the
Barnstable Town Charter, ordinance or other Town Council vote.
B.
C. Interrelationships.
79.Editor's Note: See Part VII of the Charter, § 7-1 et seq.
§ 241-3 WASTEWATER DISCHARGE § 241-4
232:629
§ 241-5. The Barnstable Town Clerk.
§ 241-6. The Barnstable Town Collector.
Town Council: The School Committee and the Town Council shall
meet during each year to cooperatively discuss financial and
educational policy matters of the Town. The School Committee
Chairman and Town Council President shall preside over each joint
meeting. The Barnstable Town Charter shall serve as the basis for
establishing and maintaining this interrelationship.
(1)
Other boards: The School Committee shall interact with any
multiple-member board within the Town as necessary, so as to
ensure furtherance of the Committee's responsibility to educate the
children of the Town.
(2)
A. Eligibility. A Town Clerk shall be elected by and from the voters at large.
Powers and duties. The Town Clerk is the keeper of vital statistics of
the Town, the custodian of the Town Seal and of all records of the
Town, administers the oath of office to all Town officers, issues licenses
and permits as may be provided by law and is responsible for the
conduct of elections and all matters relating thereto. The Town Clerk
has all the powers and duties provided that office by the laws of the
commonwealth the Barnstable Town Charter, ordinance or other Town
Council vote.
B.
Clerk of the Town Council. Unless otherwise provided by the Town
Council, the Town Clerk is to be the Clerk of the Town Council and shall
give notice of all meetings of the Town Council to its members and to
the public, keep a record of its proceedings and perform such duties as
may be assigned by the Barnstable Town Charter, by ordinance, or by
other Town Council vote.
C.
Interrelationships.
Town Council: The Town Clerk meets annually with the Town
Council in a manner convenient to both elective officers, for the
purpose of discussing those matters within the purview of the Town
Clerk.
(1)
Other officials: The Town Clerk interacts on a regular basis with
all of the administrative agencies of the Town, as well as all of
the multiple-member boards and all other elective officers, in
particular as these pertain to administration of oath of office, and
keeper of the Town records. Additionally, the Town Clerk's
department, as a full-time operation, participates in the Town's
administration through its Administrative Services Department.
(2)
D.
Eligibility. A Town Collector shall be elected by and from the voters at
large.
A.
§ 241-4 BARNSTABLE CODE § 241-6
232:630
§ 241-7. The Barnstable Housing Authority.
Powers and duties. The Town Collector is responsible for the collection
of all accounts due and payable to the Town. Town officials and Town
agencies, from time to time, shall commit to the Town Collector for
collection all accounts due and payable to the Town, listed against the
parties obligated to assume and pay the same. The Town Collector shall
pay over to the Town Treasurer all collections received with any sums
received in interest. The Town Collector has all the powers and duties
provided that office by the laws of the commonwealth, the Barnstable
Town Charter, ordinance or other Town Council vote.
B.
Interrelationships.
Town Council: The Town Collector meets annually with the Town
Council in a manner convenient to both elective officers, for the
purpose of discussing those matters within the purview of the Town
Collector.
(1)
Other officials: The Town Collector interacts on a regular basis with
the Assessing Division of the Administrative Services Department
concerning collection of assessed taxes, liens, betterments; the
Town Treasurer concerning payovers, tax title taking and
processing; the Town Attorney concerning tax titles; the
Information Technology Department for operation of computer
hardware and software matters; the Public Works Department
concerning collection of sewer and solid waste revenues; and the
Fire and Water Districts of the Town for collection of district taxes,
liens and betterments.
(2)
C.
Eligibility. There shall be a Housing Authority composed of five
members. Four shall be elected by the voters at large, the fifth member
shall be appointed by the Secretary of Communities and Development
of the commonwealth.
A.
Powers and duties. The Housing Authority provides public housing
services to low and moderate income residents of the Town. The
Authority operates pursuant to MGL Chapter 121B. The Authority
secures state and federal resources for housing assistance and operates
programs in conjunction with state and federal requirements.
B.
Interrelationships.
Town Council: In the development and planning of affordable
housing efforts, the Authority interacts with the Town Council.
The Housing Authority meets biannually with the Town Council
in a manner convenient to both elective officers, for the purpose
of discussing those matters within the purview of the Housing
Authority.
(1)
Other officials: The Housing Authority, when acting as a developer
for affordable housing, interrelates with all local boards that have
(2)
C.
§ 241-6 WASTEWATER DISCHARGE § 241-7
232:631
jurisdiction in the Chapter 40B, comprehensive permitting process.
In normal property management activities, the Authority interacts
regularly with the Board of Health, the Health and Building
Services Divisions of the Regulatory Services Department, the
Public Works Department, the Town Clerk, the Assessing Division
of the Administrative Services Department, the Planning Board, the
Town Collector, the Council on Aging, and the Town Manager. The
Authority further interacts with each of the Fire and Water Districts
of the Town for property management activities.
§ 241-7 BARNSTABLE CODE § 241-7
232:632
ARTICLE III
Multiple-Member Appointive Organization
§ 241-8. Offices and standards.
Generally. This describes all standing multiple-member body
appointments made by the Barnstable Town Council, and further
delineates manner and time of appointment and terms of appointment
generally, and authorities, responsibilities and interrelationships with
the other sections of the organization. Town of Barnstable
representatives to regional governmental boards and committees shall,
unless the organic law establishing such a committee provides
otherwise, be appointed by the Town Council.
A.
Standing committees and ad hoc committees.
This article of the Administrative Code lists and describes all
current standing committees of the Town. The Barnstable Town
Council may establish additional standing committees of the Town,
based upon passage, by a majority vote of its members, of an
ordinance creating said standing committee. Organic ordinances
establishing standing committees shall specify the following:
membership, term of office, authorities and responsibilities, and
interrelationships with both the Town Council and other agencies
within the organization.
(1)
The Barnstable Town Council may from time to time, based upon
passage by a majority vote of its membership, establish ad hoc
committees to assist the Town Council in carrying out the Council's
responsibilities. Ad hoc committees shall be limited to a particular
subject area and serve only in that capacity for a specific period of
time.
(2)
B.
Term of office. The terms of office of multiple-member boards are
arranged so that 1/3 of the terms, as nearly as is possible, shall expire
each year. A vacancy shall be filled by the Town Council for the
remainder of the term, except when vacancies occur involving a
majority of the members of a multiple-member board which conducts
adjudicatory hearings, then the Town Council may make interim
appointments for a period not to exceed six months while permanent
members are sought to fill the remainder of the term. Length of office
is three years, except as noted. Appointments are effective the first
of July, and expire the 30th of June. Numbers of members for boards
will vary. The Town Council shall annually evaluate all members subject
to reappointment. Members may be removed for cause, subject to an
investigation and hearing by the Town Council, pursuant to the Charter,
Section 2-10. [Amended 9-4-2008 by Order No. 2009-016]
C.
Annual reports. All multiple-member boards of the Town of Barnstable
shall prepare annual reports of their activities and submit same to the
Town Manager for inclusion in the Annual Report of the Town, on or
D.
§ 241-8 WASTEWATER DISCHARGE § 241-8
232:633
before the fourth Friday in January. The annual report shall describe
calendar-year activities for the year ending each December 31. Where
required by state and/or federal regulations, certain boards shall be
required to submit copies of their annual reports to appropriate state
and/or federal agencies.
Multiple-member board internal organization. Each multiple-member
board shall, at a minimum, annually elect from its membership a chair,
vice chair and clerk. Boards may further elect a treasurer, and such
other officer or officers as are deemed necessary or as is required
by statute. The annual election shall occur in July of each year, or
as near after appointment of new members by the Town Council. The
Town Council shall be notified of the officers of the board upon their
election. The chair shall preside over all meetings of the board, and
shall be the official representative of the board in all proceedings before
the Town Council and other officials of the Town. The vice chair shall
perform the chair's functions, in the absence of the chair. The clerk
shall be responsible for the certification of the board's meeting minutes,
observance of the public records law, and maintenance of other records
of the board.
E.
Time and place of meetings. The clerk of each board shall be
responsible for notifying the Town Clerk and the Town Council on or
before the first of January of the regularly scheduled board meeting
times and dates for the ensuing calendar year. The notification shall
also include a location for each regular meeting. This shall not prevent
boards from calling special meetings in addition to those regularly
scheduled, provided that, in all instances, standards of the Open
Meeting Law are followed. The Town Clerk shall ensure posting of
all meeting schedules, consistent with the Open Meeting Law.80 No
multiple-member board shall schedule a regular meeting which
conflicts with a regularly scheduled meeting of the Town Council.
F.
Authority to establish subcommittees. Each multiple-member board
may, by a majority vote of its membership, establish subcommittees of
the board for the purpose of addressing a particular issue or issues.
A report of their activities shall regularly be made to the full board.
Each subcommittee so established shall observe laws relevant to the
keeping of public records, the Open Meeting Law, and any other laws
as prescribed by the Barnstable Town Charter, by ordinance or by law.
G.
Multiple-member board meetings with Town Council. Annually at
reorganization, the President and Vice President shall designate each
Councilor as the Council liaison to one or more of the multiple-member
bodies, after taking into consideration the preferences of each
Councilor. Each multiple-member body shall have such a liaison
relationship with the Council. The chairman of each multiple-member
board shall annually, upon election, meet with the member of the Town
Council to which the board is assigned a reporting relationship, for the
H.
80.Editor's Note: See MGL C. 39, § 23B.
§ 241-8 BARNSTABLE CODE § 241-8
232:634
§ 241-9. Council on Aging.
purpose of defining an appropriate reporting relationship during the
ensuing fiscal year. The meeting should review the following minimum
areas: frequency and method of reporting, official or officials
responsible for reporting, transmittal of monthly and quarterly
summaries of board actions, and board and Council committee roles
in development of legislation and/or policy of interest to the board.
[Amended 2-2-1995 by Order No. 95-072]
Authority of standing committees.
Standing committees may be:
Advisory: wherein the committee has no legal authority to
promulgate rules or regulations, decide individual cases or
enact policy;
(a)
Regulatory: wherein the committee has legal authority to
promulgate rules and regulations, decide individual cases and
enact policy;
(b)
Ministerial: wherein the committee has legal authority to take
actions which are essentially administrative in nature; or
(c)
(d) Combinations of advisory, regulatory, and ministerial.
(1)
(2) Standing committees shall be defined in the manner noted.
I.
Eligibility for service. Any registered voter of the Town of Barnstable,
except a permanent full-time municipal employee of the Town, is
eligible to be appointed to a standing committee of the Town. Only
where expressly authorized by the Barnstable Town Charter, the Town
Administrative Code, ordinance or general law shall a permanent fulltime
municipal employee be appointed by the Town Council for service
on a standing committee. This limitation shall not apply to ad hoc
committees as further defined in Subsection B of this § 241-8.
Membership on a standing committee of the Town shall terminate
forthwith upon the members ceasing to be a resident of the Town or
otherwise ceasing to be a registered voter, unless explicitly excused
from the foregoing residence and voter requirements of the Town.
[Amended 8-15-1996 by Order No. 97-017]
J.
Term of office. There shall be a Council on Aging consisting of three
member classifications: nine regular members, one alternate member,
and two associate members. The alternate member may serve on
committees and will have voting rights at meetings if there is an
absence of a regular member. Associate members may serve on
committees,but have no voting privileges if a regular member is absent.
[Amended 10-14-1999 by Order No. 00-026; 8-16-2007 by Order
No. 2008-002; 2-25-2016 by Order No. 2016-074]
A.
§ 241-8 WASTEWATER DISCHARGE § 241-9
232:635
§ 241-10. Airport Commission.
Authorities and responsibilities. The purpose of the Council on Aging
is to advocate for and to meet the needs of the elderly people residing
in the Town of Barnstable. The Council on Aging surveys the elderly
population to better determine their needs problems and concerns.
It develops criteria for program and supportive services development
based upon an assessment of needs and participates in programs
offered by the commonwealth's Department of Elder Affairs. The
Council on Aging is an advisory committee of the Town.
B.
Interrelationships.
Town Council: The Council on Aging interacts with the Town
Council in the matter of developing policies and legislation
concerning itself with the issues and needs facing the elderly
within the Town. The Council on Aging interacts primarily with
the Council Committee on Human Resources, in order to regularly
apprise said Committee on current activities and concerns of the
Council on Aging.
(1)
Town Manager: The Council on Aging interacts with the Town
Manager and the administrative organization primarily through the
Senior Services Division of the Community Services Department,
the latter whom provides administrative staff support to the
Council on Aging. The Council on Aging provides advisory
information to the Senior Services Director concerning program
and supportive service delivery as well as financial management
issues.
(2)
C.
Term of office. There shall be an Airport Commission consisting of
seven members, appointed for three-year terms, provided that no more
than three members' terms shall expire in any one year. [Amended
10-4-2001 by Order No. 2002-021]
A.
Authorities and responsibilities.
The Airport Commission is responsible for the custody, care and
maintenance of the Barnstable Municipal Airport, as well as
ensuring a safe and efficient operation under pertinent rules and
regulations. The Commission operates under the authorities
provided to airport commissions pursuant to MGL C. 90, by the
Barnstable Town Charter, ordinance, and by any other state and/
or federal rules and regulations governing airports. The Airport
Commission is a regulatory and ministerial committee of the Town.
(1)
The Airport Commission appoints an Airport Manager who is the
executive officer of the Commission, and may also appoint an
assistant airport manager. The Airport Commission may, consistent
with state procurement regulations, let or lease land areas at the
airport for up to 20 years, determine charges or rentals for
(2)
B.
§ 241-9 BARNSTABLE CODE § 241-10
232:636
property, facilities, installations, landing fees and services, and
determine the terms and conditions for such charges. Subject to
the approval of the Town Council, the Airport Commission may let
or lease for longer periods.
The Airport Commission is authorized to expend any funds granted
by the Town, state or federal government for airport purposes and
may make contracts for the maintenance, operation, construction,
enlargement and improvement of the airport pursuant to the laws
of the commonwealth governing the making of such contracts.
(3)
The Airport Commission shall adopt rules and regulations for the
use of the airport or for the safety of the public upon or beyond the
limits of the airport under its control. Such rules and regulations
must be approved by the Massachusetts Aeronautics Commission
and published in the same manner that ordinances are required to
be published.
(4)
If the Airport Commission obtains an offer for a grant of federal
funds, it shall designate the Massachusetts Aeronautics
Commission as its agent to receive federal monies and receipt
therefor in its behalf, and shall enter into an agreement with the
Massachusetts Aeronautics Commission prescribing the terms and
conditions of such agency in accordance with federal laws, rules
and regulations and applicable laws of the commonwealth.
(5)
The Airport Commission may invite bids for any contract involving
the acquisition, establishment, construction, enlargement,
protection, equipment, maintenance or operation of its airport, and
shall submit every such proposed contract to said Massachusetts
Aeronautics Commission for approval. After approval has been
given, the Airport Commission may award such contracts, subject
to availability of appropriation.
(6)
The Airport Commission assumes all other responsibilities and
authorities granted pursuant to MGL C. 90, and pertinent state
and/or federal regulations. It establishes all policies concerning
personnel and fixes compensation rates for personnel through
Commission decision or negotiations, with compensation rates
subject to appropriation.
(7)
Interrelationships.
Town Council: The Airport Commission interacts with the Town
Council in the matter of developing policies and legislation
concerned with the issues and problems inherent in the operation
and maintenance of the Barnstable Municipal Airport. The Airport
Commission interacts primarily with the Council Committee on
Finance in order to regularly apprise the Committee on current
activities and concerns of the Airport Commission.
(1)
C.
§ 241-10 WASTEWATER DISCHARGE § 241-10
232:637
§ 241-11. Zoning Board of Appeals.
Town Manager: The Airport Commission interacts with the Town
Manager and the administrative organization primarily through
the Airport Manager, the latter whom serves to interact with all
other administrative personnel within the Town for the purpose
of maintaining and managing the airport's personnel, financial
management, informational, and other management systems.
Regular interaction shall involve the departments of Administrative
Services, Police, the Divisions of Health, Conservation, within the
Department of Regulatory Services, and Public Works; as well
as the Fire and Water Districts. The Town Manager meets with
the Commission as necessary, for review of financial, collective
bargaining, informational and other administrative matters.
(2)
Term of office. There shall be a Zoning Board of Appeals consisting
of five members and up to four associate members. [Amended
8-15-1991 by Order No. 92-05]
A.
Authorities and responsibilities. The Zoning Board of Appeals hears and
decides individual cases brought by persons seeking land use relief; all
as provided for in MGL Chapter 40A, §§ 7 through 17, and the Zoning
Ordinance of the Town.81 The Zoning Board of Appeals is an advisory
and regulatory committee of the Town. The Board acts as a board of
appeals on matters of subdivision control under the applicable sections
of MGL Chapter 41, §§ 81M, 81Y, 81Z, 81AA, 81BB; and decides on
comprehensive permits pursuant to the provisions of MGL Chapter
40B, §§ 20 through 23, provided that with respect to comprehensive
permits issued under Chapter 9, Article II, of the Code, said permits
shall be determined after hearing by a Hearing Officer appointed in
conformity with § 241-47.5E of this chapter, and provided further that
the Hearing Officer shall be appointed by the Town Manager from
among the regular members of the Zoning Board of Appeals and s/
he shall be compensated for serving as Hearing Officer. [Amended
4-5-2001]
B.
Interrelationships
Town Council: The Zoning Board of Appeals interacts with the
Town Council in the matter of developing policies and legislation
concerned with the issues and problems of comprehensive zoning
within the Town. The Zoning Board of Appeals interacts primarily
with the Council Committee on Planning and Development in order
to regularly apprise the Council on current activities and concerns
of the Zoning Board.
(1)
Town Manager: The Zoning Board of Appeals interacts with the
Town Manager and the administrative organization primarily
through the Planning Department, the latter which serves to
(2)
C.
81.Editor's Note: See Ch. 240, Zoning.
§ 241-10 BARNSTABLE CODE § 241-11
232:638
§ 241-12. Cultural Council. [Amended 9-23-1993 by Order No.
93-130]
§ 241-13. Board of Assessors.
interact with all other administrative agencies within the Town for
the purpose of providing professional assistance to the Board in the
areas of land use planning, site plan review, zoning, engineering
and the law.
Other boards: As occasioned, the Zoning Board of Appeals interacts
with either the Planning Board, Conservation Commission, Old
Kings Historic District Committee, the Board of Health, the
Historical Commission, the Economic Development Commission,
the Licensing Authority, and the Public Works Commission, in order
to effectuate accomplishment of the Board's responsibilities.
(3)
Term of office. There shall be a Cultural Council, to consist of 11
members. Members shall have demonstrated scholarship or creativity
in, or distinguished service to, the arts, humanities, or interpretive
sciences. [Amended 5-1-1997 by Order No. 97-125]
A.
Authorities and responsibilities. The Cultural Council decides the
distribution of arts lottery funds or other funds that may be available
to it and may also conduct other activities to promote and encourage
the arts, humanities, or interpretive sciences. The Cultural Council
operates pursuant to the provisions of MGL C. 10, § 58, as amended.
The Cultural Council is an advisory and ministerial committee of the
Town.
B.
Interrelationships.
Town Council: The Cultural Council interacts with the Town
Council for the purpose of discussing policies and legislation
designed to promote and encourage the arts with the Town. The
Cultural Council interacts primarily with Council Committee on
Human Resources for this purpose.
(1)
Town Manager: The Cultural Council interacts with the Town
Manager for the purpose of receiving administrative support,
financial assistance, utilization of property for the purpose of
sponsoring art exhibits, displays and related administrative
activities. [Amended 8-19-1993 by Order No. 93-130]
(2)
C.
Term of office. There shall be a Board of Assessors consisting of three
members.
A.
Authorities and responsibilities. The Board of Assessors annually make
a fair cash valuation of all of the estate, both real and personal, subject
to taxation within the Town. They annually determine the annual tax
rate necessary to meet all sums voted by the Town. They hear and
decide all questions relating to the abatement of taxes levied by it. They
B.
§ 241-11 WASTEWATER DISCHARGE § 241-13
232:639
§ 241-14. Cable Television Advisory Committee.
have all of the other powers, duties and responsibilities which are given
to Boards of Assessors by general laws. The Board of Assessors is an
advisory and regulatory committee of the Town.
Interrelationships.
Town Council: The Board of Assessors interacts with the Town
Council for the purpose of annually providing the Council with
the necessary classification rate information for the holding of
classification hearings, to include exemption recommendations, as
well as to advise the Town Council on legislative and policy matters
concerning valuation, classification, abatements, and otherwise.
The Board of Assessors interacts primarily with the Council
Committee on Finance, in order to advise on the aforementioned
issues.
(1)
Town Manager: The Board of Assessors interacts with the Town
Manager primarily through the Assessing Division of the
Administrative Services Department, the latter which performs the
necessary administrative functions necessary to implement the
Board's determinations. The Town Manager otherwise provides
support as requested or required by law.82
(2)
C.
Term of office. There shall be a Cable Television Advisory Committee
consisting of five members.
A.
Authorities and responsibilities.
The Cable Television Advisory Committee advises the Town
Manager on matters relating to the licensing and supervision of a
contract for cable television services in the Town consistent with
MGL Chapter 166A. Consistent with the cable television contract,
the Committee may be designated by the Town Manager to
exercise certain authorities under the contract.
(1)
The Committee acts as a sounding board for citizen complaints
and suggestions relating to the cable television services and shall,
under the direction of the Town Manager, refer subscriber
complaints to the cable operator for appropriate resolution. The
Committee meets not less than once each quarter for the purpose
of reviewing cable contract compliance, and advising on other
licensing matters. The Cable Television Advisory Committee is an
advisory committee of the Town.
(2)
The Committee further advises and otherwise assists the Town
Manager in establishing rules and regulations for development,
servicing, and delivery of public, educational and government
(3)
B.
82.Editor's Note: Original Section 7.00, Building Code Board of Appeals Board, which
immediately followed this section, was deleted 2-19-1998 by Order No. 98-067.
§ 241-13 BARNSTABLE CODE § 241-14
232:640
§ 241-15. Conservation Commission.
(PEG) television policies. [Added 5-4-2017 by Order No.
2017-141]
Interrelationships.
Town Council: The Cable Television Advisory Committee interacts
with the Town Council for the purpose of advising the Town Council
on matters relating to issues and legislation concerning cable
television matters.
(1)
Town Manager: The Cable Television Advisory Committee interacts
with the Town Manager, and otherwise provides advice and
recommendations to the Manager in the matter of licensing for
the cable contract and establishing rules and regulations for the
development, servicing, and delivery of PEG television policies.
The Community Services Department provides staff support to the
Committee, when requested, in order to effectuate efficient
management of the cable license and PEG policies. [Amended
5-4-2017 by Order No. 2017-141]
(2)
C.
Term of office. There shall be a Conservation Commission consisting of
seven members.
A.
Authorities and responsibilities.
The purpose of the Conservation Commission is to protect, promote
and enhance the quantity and quality of the natural resources
within the Town, especially wetlands, wildlife and water resources;
through planning, acquisition, land management, regulation,
scientific research and public education. The Commission may
conduct researches into its local land areas and shall seek to
coordinate the activities of unofficial bodies organized for similar
purposes. The Conservation Commission is an advisory and
regulatory committee of the Town.
(1)
The Conservation Commission may receive gifts, bequests or
devises of personal property or interests in real property in the
name of the Town, subject to approval of the Town Manager. The
Commission may receive monetary gifts for development of a
Conservation Fund, and expend the same, subject to the General
Laws and the approval of the Town Manager.
(2)
The Conservation Commission is responsible for the
implementation of the provisions of MGL Chapter 131, § 40, in
protecting floodplains, sea coasts and other wetlands within the
Town, and Chapter 237, Wetlands Protection, of the Code of the
Town of Barnstable.
(3)
The Conservation Commission is responsible, with the Recreation
Commission, for development and adoption of the Town's Open
(4)
B.
§ 241-14 WASTEWATER DISCHARGE § 241-15
232:641
§ 241-16. (Reserved)83
§ 241-17. Housing Committee. [Amended 8-21-1997 by Order No.
97-156; 2-1-2018 by Order No. 2018-058]
Space and Recreation Plan, subject to Town Council approval. The
Commission may adopt policies and promulgate land management
plans for properties of the Town reserved for conservation
purposes.
Interrelationships.
Town Council: The Conservation Commission interacts with the
Town Council for the purposes of developing policies and
legislation for the Town designed to protect, promote and enhance
the quantity and quality of the natural resources within the Town.
The Commission interacts primarily through the Council
Committee on Planning and Development in furtherance of these
objectives.
(1)
Town Manager: The Conservation Commission interacts with the
Manager in all matters relating to the receipt of gifts, bequests
or devises of personal property or interests in real property in
the name of the Town. Administrative support to the Commission
is primarily through the Conservation Division of the Regulatory
Services Department which coordinates the activities of other
administrative departments in order to ensure effectiveness of the
Commission's deliberations.
(2)
Other boards: As occasioned, the Conservation Commission
interacts with the Planning Board, Zoning Board of Appeals, Old
Kings Historic District Committee, the Board of Health, and the
Historical Commission, in order to effectuate accomplishment of
the Commission's mission.
(3)
C.
Term of office. There shall be a Housing Committee, composed of five
regular members, plus two alternate members. The alternate members
shall have voting rights at meetings if there is an absence of a regular
member or members. The regular and alternate members may include,
but shall not be limited to, individuals who fall into any of the following
categories or affiliations: banking industry, real estate, industry,
housing authority, minority groups, single head of household, private
developers, nonprofit civic groups and tenants' associations.
A.
Authorities and responsibilities. The Housing Committee facilitates the
coordination of the factors that affect equal access to housing and
issues relating to the development of affordable housing and functions
as the Town's local housing partnership for the Commonwealth's Local
B.
83.Editor’s Note: Former § 241-16, Economic Development Commission, as amended, was
repealed 10-18-2018 by Order No. 2019-033.
§ 241-15 BARNSTABLE CODE § 241-17
232:642
§ 241-18. Comprehensive Financial Advisory Committee. [Amended
12-16-1993 by Order No. 94-001]
Initiative Program. The Committee also provides advice to the Town
Council regarding the Town's policies and programs for meeting its
requirements under MGL c. 40B, §§ 21 through 23. The Housing
Committee is an advisory committee of the Town.
Interrelationships.
Town Council: The Housing Committee interacts with the Town
Council to provide advice to the Council regarding policies and
programs aimed at increasing the Town's supply of a diverse
housing stock to meet the documented housing needs of its
residents and meeting its requirements under MGL c. 40B, §§ 21
through 23. The Committee meets annually, or more frequently as
is necessary, with the Town Council to apprise the Town Council of
issues pertaining to affordable housing and to discuss policies to
effectuate fair and affordable housing in the Town.84
(1)
Town Manager: The Housing Committee interacts with the
Manager to provide advice regarding policies and program aimed
at meeting its requirements under MGL c. 40B, §§ 20 through 23,
and for increasing the Town's supply of a diverse housing stock to
meet the documented housing needs of its residents. The Manager
provides staff support to the Committee through the Planning and
Development Department, and other appropriate staff.
(2)
Other boards: The Housing Committee meets as necessary with
the Planning Board, Zoning Board of Appeals, Conservation
Commission, Board of Health, Historical Commission, Old King's
Highway Historic District Committee, and the Housing Authority,
to ensure compliance with the fair and affordable housing policies
of the Town.
(3)
C.
Term of office. There shall be a Comprehensive Financial Advisory
Committee, consisting of nine members. The terms shall be for three
years so arranged so an equal number shall expire each year.
[Amended 10-22-1998 by Order No. 99-023; 11-2-2006 by Order
No. 2007-041]
A.
Authorities and responsibilities.
The Comprehensive Financial Advisory Committee provides
financial advice to the Town Council on the yearly operating budget
for all Town agencies, which includes the school budget as adopted
by the School Committee.
(1)
B.
84.Editor's Note: See Ch. 9, Affordable Housing.
§ 241-17 WASTEWATER DISCHARGE § 241-18
232:643
§ 241-19. Golf Committee. [Amended 4-6-2000 by Order No.
2000-086; 7-17-2003 by Order No. 2004-009; 2-3-2011 by Order No.
2011-049]
The Comprehensive Financial Advisory Committee provides
financial advice to the Town Council and to the Town Manager on
matters of long-range financial planning.
(2)
The Comprehensive Financial Advisory Committee is responsible
for advising the Town Manager on the annual preparation of the
Town's capital improvement plan. It prepares a report to the Town
Council on said annual capital improvement program and
participates in public hearings called for review of this program.
(3)
Interrelationships.
Town Council: The Comprehensive Financial Advisory Committee
interacts with the Town Council.
(1)
Town Manager: The Comprehensive Financial Advisory Committee
interacts with the Manager for the purpose of providing advice
and exchanging information in matters of operational budgeting,
capital budgeting, and long-term financial forecasting.
(2)
C.
Composition. There shall be a Golf Committee consisting of at least
seven members appointed through nominations by the Appointments
Committee.
A.
Authorities and responsibilities. The Golf Committee is advisory to the
Town Manager relative to the operation of the municipal golf courses.
The Committee advises on the establishment of course policies, rules
and regulations. The Town Manager retains authority over the
personnel and financial matters for the proper operation of the courses,
including the setting of the rates; however, the Town Manager seeks
the Committee's recommendations on rates. The Committee provides
advice to the Town Manager in the preparation of the operating and
capital budgets for the municipal courses. The Golf Committee is an
advisory committee of the Town.
B.
Interrelationships.
Town Council: The Golf Committee interacts with the Town Council
in order to discuss matters of municipal golf course policies, rules,
and regulations.
(1)
Town Manager: The Golf Committee interacts with the Manager
for the purposes noted herein, seeking to ensure that the Manager
remains apprised of the needs of the municipal golf courses. The
Manager provides staff support to the Committee through the Golf
Section of Community Services Department, Recreation Division.
(2)
C.
§ 241-18 BARNSTABLE CODE § 241-19
232:644
§ 241-20. Disability Commission. [Amended 9-23-1993 by Order No.
93-130]
Term of office. Terms are three years, staggered dates of expiration so
that no more than three expire each year.
D.
Term of office. There shall be a Disability Commission consisting of
not more than 11 members. A majority of the persons appointed shall
consist either of persons with disabilities or persons in an immediate
family of a person with a disability or persons who have extensive
experience in the field of disabilities, and one member shall be an
employee of the Town. The Commission may appoint two alternates.
A.
Authorities and responsibilities. The Disability Commission seeks to
research local problems of people with disabilities; advise and assist
municipal officials and employees in ensuring compliance with state
and federal laws and regulations that affect people with disabilities;
coordinate or carry out programs designed to meet the problems of
people with disabilities in coordination with programs of the
Massachusetts Office on Disability; review and make recommendations
about policies, procedures, services, activities and facilities of
departments and boards of the Town as they affect people with
disabilities; provide information, referrals, guidance and technical
assistance to individuals, public agencies, businesses and organizations
in all matters pertaining to disability; and coordinate the activities of
other local groups organized for similar purposes. The Commission
may draft rules and regulations concerning disabled persons needs
and issues, for adoption by the Town Manager and Town Council. The
Commission may receive gifts of property, both real and personal, in
the name of the Town, subject to approval of the Town Manager, such
gifts to be managed and controlled by the Commission. The Disability
Commission is an advisory committee of the Town.
B.
Interrelationships.
Town Council: The Disability Commission interacts with the Town
Council to advise the Council on policies designed to meet the
needs of the disabled. The Commission interacts primarily with
the Council Committees on Human Resources and Planning and
Development.
(1)
Town Manager: The Disability Commission interacts with the
Manager to ensure that Town programs and activities, as well as
facilities, seek to improve and enhance service to the disabled,
as well as come into compliance with state and federal standards
concerning same. The Commission receives administrative support
through the Human Resource Department.
(2)
Other boards: The Disability Commission interacts with the
Planning Board, Zoning Board of Appeals, Conservation
Commission, Board of Health, Historical Commission, Old King's
(3)
C.
§ 241-19 WASTEWATER DISCHARGE § 241-20
232:645
§ 241-21. Board of Health.
Highway Historic District Committee, Public Works Commission,
Housing Authority, and to ensure compliance with relevant laws,
rules and regulations concerning disabled persons. [Amended
1-20-2005 by Order No. 2005-038]
Term of office. There shall be a Board of Health consisting of three
regular members, one of whom shall be a physician, plus one alternate
member. The alternate member shall have voting rights at meetings if
there is an absence of a regular member. [Amended 7-16-2009 by
Order No. 2010-002]
A.
Authorities and responsibilities. The Board of Health seeks to preserve
and maintain the Town's public health standards and protect its
environmental resources by educational means and by strict
enforcement of various regulations, ordinances, State Health Codes,
General Laws, in particular MGL Chapter 111, and federal law. The
Board carries out duties and responsibilities assigned by either state or
local legislation, as these primarily concern public health standards and
protection of environmental resources. The Board establishes policies
and programs for implementation by the Health Department. The Board
of Health is an advisory and regulatory committee of the Town.
B.
Interrelationships.
Town Council: The Board of Health interacts with the Town Council
concerning issues related to the public health of the Town. The
Board interacts primarily with the Council Committees on Planning
and Development and Human Resources to discuss policies and
legislation in regard to public health.
(1)
Town Manager: The Board of Health interacts with the Town
Manager for the purpose of ensuring that administrative staff in the
Health Division of the Regulatory Services Department carry out
the implementation of the Board's rules, regulations, and decisions.
The Manager meets periodically with the Board so as to ensure that
administrative staff support is effective.
(2)
Other boards: As necessary, the Board interacts with other boards
within the Town on issues of concern to the public health, including
the Planning Board, Conservation Commission, Old Kings Historic
District Committee, the Barnstable Housing Authority, the
Historical Commission, the Economic Development Commission,
the Licensing Authority, and the Public Works Commission.
(3)
C.
Office space. The Town Manager shall provide a suitable office for the
Board of Health in the Town Office Building, and all books, records
and documents pertaining to the doings of the Board, properly indexed,
shall be kept on file in said office for convenient inspection by the Town
D.
§ 241-20 BARNSTABLE CODE § 241-21
232:646
§ 241-22. Historical Commission. [Amended 11-5-1992 by Order No.
93-026]
officials and the Board's successors in office. [Added 1-20-2005 by
Order No. 2005-038]
Term of office. There shall be a Historical Commission consisting of
seven regular members and one alternate. The alternate shall have
voting rights at meetings only in the absence of a regular member.
[Amended 8-2-2012 by Order No. 2013-002]
A.
Authorities and responsibilities.
The purpose of the Historical Commission is to preserve, protect,
and develop the historical and archaeological assets of the Town.
The Commission may conduct research for places of historic and
archaeological value, and shall cooperate with the State
Archaeologist in conducting such research. It seeks to coordinate
the activities of unofficial bodies organized for similar purposes
and may, subject to appropriation and approval by the Town
Manager, advertise, prepare, print and distribute books, maps,
charts, plans and pamphlets which it deems necessary for its work.
(1)
The Historical Commission, for the purpose of protecting and
preserving such places may make such recommendations as it
deems necessary to the Town Council, and, subject to the approval
of the Town Council, to the Massachusetts Historical Commission,
that any such place be certified as an historical or archaeological
landmark.
(2)
The Historical Commission may hold hearings, may recommend
to the Town Manager execution of contracts with individuals,
organizations and institutions or services furthering the objectives
of its program, may recommend to the Town Manager execution
of contracts with local or regional associations for cooperative
endeavors furthering its program, and may, with the approval of
the Town Council, accept gifts, contributions and bequests of funds
from individuals, foundations and from federal, state or other
governmental bodies for the purpose of furthering its programs.
The Commission may recommend to the Town Manager acquisition
of property by gift, purchase, grant, bequest, devise, lease or
otherwise a fee or lesser interest in real or personal property
of significant historical value and, upon approval by the Town
Manager, may be directed to manage the same, may make and
execute any agreement and may do and perform any and all acts
which may be necessary or desirable to carry out the purposes of
this section. [Amended 8-2-2012 by Order No. 2013-002]
(3)
The Historical Commission surveys and compiles a listing of all
historical sites and buildings within the Town, public and private;
determines the functions and structures of all historical
(4)
B.
§ 241-21 WASTEWATER DISCHARGE § 241-22
232:647
§ 241-23. John F. Kennedy Memorial Trust Fund Committee.
organizations within the Town; and holds correlative seminars with
historical organizations. It further determines the requirements for
repair, reconstruction, and protection of historical landmarks and
assists and cooperates with public commissions in the conduct of
public historical events. The Historical Commission is an advisory
committee of the Town.
Interrelationships.
Town Council: The Historical Commission interacts with the Town
Council to advise the Council on policies and legislation concerning
the preservation, protection and development of historical or
archaeological assets in the Town. The Commission interacts
primarily with the Council Committee on Planning and
Development.
(1)
Town Manager: The Historical Commission interacts with the
Manager primarily for the purposes outlined in order to effectuate
publication of its activities and/or acquisition of interests in
historical properties within the Town. Principal agencies are the
Planning and Development Department, Regulatory Services
Department (Conservation and Building Services Divisions), and
Public Works. Administrative support is provided to the
Commission through the Planning and Development Department.
[Amended 8-2-2012 by Order No. 2013-002; 5-4-2017 by
Order No. 2017-142]
(2)
Other boards: The Historical Commission shall, with respect to
matters or actions affecting the historical or archaeological assets
of the Town, coordinate with state boards and agencies, including,
but not limited to, the Massachusetts Historical Commission, the
State Archaeologist, the Cape Cod Commission, planning
committees and interact with respect to such matters or actions
with Town boards and agencies existing now or in the future,
including, but not limited to the Planning Board, Zoning Board of
Appeals, Old Kings Highway Historic District Committee, Public
Works Commission, Conservation Commission, Sandy Neck Board,
Board of Health, the Barnstable Housing Authority, other district
governments, and the Site Plan Review Committee as necessary
in order to better coordinate the activities of these boards in
instances where properties of either a historical or archaeological
value are under consideration by these boards.85
(3)
C.
Term of office. There shall be a John F. Kennedy Memorial Trust Fund
Committee consisting of five members, one of whom shall be the Town
Manager, and one of whom shall be the Chairman of the Recreation
A.
85.Editor's Note: Original Section 18.00, Industrial Development Finance Authority, which
immediately followed this section, was deleted 5-21-1998 by Order No. 98-120.
§ 241-22 BARNSTABLE CODE § 241-23
232:648
§ 241-24. Town Library Committee.
§ 241-25. Licensing Authority.
Commission with the other trustees appointed at large. [Amended
11-7-1991 by Order No. 92-43; 7-18-2002 by Order No. 2003-003]
Authorities and responsibilities. The John F. Kennedy Memorial Trust
Fund Committee has broad general powers to use the income and
principal received by the trust at their discretion in the field of youth
activities within the Town. The Committee may make recommendations
to the Town Manager regarding the establishment and maintenance
of youth activities programs it fosters and the Kennedy Memorial.
The Committee may grant scholarships to Barnstable High School
graduates. The Committee acts pursuant to the Acts of 1971, Chapter
34. The funds shall be invested in the manner provided by MGL Chapter
44, § 54, and in further accordance with the trust policy of the Town.
The John F. Kennedy Memorial Trust Fund Committee is a ministerial
committee of the Town.
B.
Interrelationships.
Town Council: The Committee annually reports its activities to the
Council, through the Council Committee on Human Resources.
(1)
Town Manager: The Committee interacts with the Town Manager
for the purposes outlined, and receives administrative support from
the Manager in accordance with the accomplishment of its duties.
(2)
C.
Term of office. There shall be a Town Library Committee consisting
of 14 members, two from each library, to be composed of individuals
nominated by the boards of each of the seven libraries of the Town.
Terms of office shall be for one year. [Amended 12-2-1993 by Order
No. 94-072-T]
A.
Authorities and responsibilities. The Town Library Committee has no
independent authority within the Town's municipal operations, but
serves primarily to be the body which the Town interacts with for
the purpose of the Town's financial assistance to the libraries. The
Committee represents to the Town, the interests, issues, and concerns
of the libraries of the Town. The Town Library Committee is an advisory
committee of the Town.
B.
Interrelationships.
Town Council: The Committee meets annually with the Council
Committee on Human Resources for the accomplishing the
purposes described herein.
(1)
Town Manager: The Committee meets as necessary with the
Manager for the purposes outlined, and further, in order to
participate in the annual budget process.
(2)
C.
§ 241-23 WASTEWATER DISCHARGE § 241-25
232:649
§ 241-26. Old King's Highway Historic District Committee.
Term of office. There shall be a Licensing Authority consisting of three
members and not more than three associate members. They shall not be
engaged, directly or indirectly, in the manufacture or sale of alcoholic
beverages and shall be voters of the Town. If any member or associate
member of said board engages directly or indirectly in such
manufacture or sale, his or her office shall immediately become vacant.
[Amended 11-3-2005]
A.
Authorities and responsibilities. The Licensing Authority may grant
licenses relating to alcoholic beverages under Chapter 138 of the
General Laws and those licenses under Chapter 140 of the General
Laws which are not, by the provisions of said chapter, placed within
the jurisdiction of another municipal officer or agency, and shall have
all the powers and duties of a licensing authority under said chapters.
The Licensing Authority is an advisory and regulatory committee of the
Town.
B.
Interrelationships.
Town Council: The Licensing Authority annually reports to the
Council the Authority's activities, with recommendations as
necessary concerning issues relative to Chapter 138 and Chapter
140 licensing within the Town.
(1)
Town Manager: The Licensing Authority interacts with the
Manager for the purposes of receiving administrative support for
its deliberations and responsibilities, to include but not be limited
to the departments of Town Manager, Legal, and Consumer Affairs
Division and Health Division of the Regulatory Services
Department. The Authority shall further discuss with the Manager
budgetary issues and other related licensing issues of the Town.
(2)
C.
Term of office. There shall be an Old King's Highway Historic District
Committee consisting of five members. At least one of the members
shall be an architect, who need not be a resident of the district. In
the event an architect is not available for service, a building contractor
with not less than five years' experience in the building trades may
be appointed a member, in lieu of the architect. The offices of the
Committee, except that of the architect, shall be filled by the election
at a meeting of registered voters residing in the district held annually
at the call of the Town Council, one to two months prior to expiration,
consistent with district regulations concerning elections. The terms of
members shall be four years, so arranged that the term of one member
expires each year. The office of architect shall be appointed annually
by the Town Council. The Town Council may, upon the nomination and
approval of the Committee, annually appoint one person residing in the
district to serve as an alternate member. Vacancies occurring in the
Committee other than by expiration shall be filled by appointment by
the Town Council.
A.
§ 241-25 BARNSTABLE CODE § 241-26
232:650
Authorities and responsibilities.
The Old King's Highway Historic District Committee is the Town
of Barnstable's delegation to the Old King's Highway Regional
Historic District. The local Committee seeks, along with the
Regional Commission, to promote the educational, cultural,
economic, aesthetic and literary significance through the
preservation and protection of buildings, settings and places within
the boundaries of the regional district and through the
development and maintenance of appropriate settings and the
exterior appearance of such buildings and places, so as to preserve
and maintain the regional district as a contemporary landmark
compatible with the historic, cultural, literary and aesthetic
tradition of Barnstable County, as it existed in the early days of
Cape Cod. The district within the Town is all land area north of
the mid-Cape Highway (Route 6), bounded further by Sandwich on
the west, and Yarmouth on the east. The Committee is an advisory
and regulatory committee of the Town, pursuant to the Old King's
Highway Regional Historic District Act, as established by the Acts
of 1973, Chapter 470, as amended.
(1)
The Committee acts in accordance with the Acts of 1973, Chapter
470, as amended, and the Rules and Regulations of the Regional
Commission. The Committee holds hearings. The Committee
determines the appropriateness of exterior architectural features
of buildings and structures to be erected within the district; passes
upon the demolition or removal of any building or structure or
any part thereof; determines the appropriateness of the erection or
display of occupational, commercial or other signs and billboards
within the district wherever a certificate of appropriateness is
required.
(2)
B.
Interrelationships.
Town Council: The Old King's Highway Historic District Committee
interacts with the Town Council to ensure Town policy and
legislation of interest to the district is preserved and enhanced.
The primary interaction occurs with the Council Planning and
Development Committee.
(1)
Town Manager: The Old King's Highway Historic District
Committee interacts with the Town Manager primarily to receive
administrative and financial assistance in pursuit of the
Committee's activities. The Committee receives such assistance
through the Planning Department. The Committee further receives
enforcement assistance through the Building Services Division of
the Regulatory Services Department, and other Town agencies as
appropriate.
(2)
Other boards: The Old King's Highway Historic District Committee
interacts with the Zoning Board of Appeals, Planning Board,
(3)
C.
§ 241-26 WASTEWATER DISCHARGE § 241-26
232:651
§ 241-27. (Reserved)86
§ 241-28. (Reserved)
§ 241-29. Planning Board.
§ 241-30. Infrastructure and Energy Committee. [Added 7-19-2018
by Order No. 2018-17789]
Conservation Commission, the Board of Health, the Historical
Commission, the Economic Development Commission, the
Licensing Authority, and the Public Works Commission, in order to
effectuate accomplishment of the Board's responsibilities.
Term of office. There shall be a Planning Board consisting of seven
members.
A.
Authorities and responsibilities. The Planning Board makes
recommendations to the Town Council with regard to any changes in
the Zoning Ordinance of the Town.87 The Board is responsible for the
regulation of subdivisions within the Town pursuant to MGL Chapter
41, §§ 81A through 81GG.88 It renders advice concerning land use
planning to the Town Council. The Planning Board is an advisory and
regulatory committee of the Town.
B.
Interrelationships.
Town Council: The Planning Board interacts with the Town Council,
principally through the Council Committee on Planning and
Development concerning items related to zoning, subdivisions, land
use planning.
(1)
Town Manager: The Planning Board interacts with the Manager by
receiving administrative support, primarily through the Planning
Department, Public Works Department and Town Attorney's office.
(2)
Other boards: The Planning Board interacts with the Zoning Board
of Appeals, Conservation Commission, Board of Health, Old King's
Highway Historic District Committee, Historical Commission,
Disability Commission, Economic Development Commission, and
Public Works Commission in furtherance of its responsibilities.
(3)
C.
Term of office. There shall be an Infrastructure and Energy Committee
consisting of seven regular members. Members of the Infrastructure
A.
86.Editor's Note: Former § 241-27, Personnel Board, was repealed 6-21-2018 by Order No.
2018-155.
87.Editor's Note: See Ch. 240, Zoning.
88.Editor's Note: See Ch. 801, Subdivision Regulations.
89.Editor's Note: This order also repealed former § 241-30, Public Works Commission, as
amended.
§ 241-26 BARNSTABLE CODE § 241-30
232:652
§ 241-31. Recreation Commission.
and Energy Committee shall serve for terms of three years, so arranged
that as equal a number of terms as possible shall expire each year.
Authorities and responsibilities. The Infrastructure and Energy
Committee is a standing committee serving as an advisory board to
the Town Council, Town Manager and Department of Public Works. The
Committee's charge is to:
Provide the Town Manager and the Director of Public Works with
recommendations concerning the development of rules and
regulations for the maintenance and sanitary operation of the solid
waste transfer station, water pollution control facilities, public
roads, bridges, sidewalks, parking lots, parks, bulkheads, docks,
Town landings, beaches, playgrounds, recreation and conservation
areas, cemeteries, Town forests, and public buildings, excluding
schools.
(1)
Recommend viable methods for achieving energy conservation and
for utilizing renewable sources of energy within the Town.
(2)
Promote energy efficiency programs available through the Cape
Light Compact in residential and commercial sectors.
(3)
B.
Interrelationships.
Town Council: The Infrastructure and Energy Committee interacts
with the Town Council to advise the Council on those policies
and legislative matters concerning public works and energy
conservation and renewable energy activities within the Town.
(1)
Town Manager: The Infrastructure and Energy Committee provides
the Manager with recommendations in order to accomplish and
effectuate its mission.
(2)
Other boards: The Infrastructure and Energy Committee interacts,
as necessary, with any Town board requiring or requesting
assistance in matters of public works and energy conservation and
renewable energy activities in the Town.
(3)
C.
Term of office. There shall be a Recreation Commission consisting of
seven members.
A.
Authorities and responsibilities. The Recreation Commission advises
and otherwise assists the Town Manager in the establishment of rules
and regulations concerning the use of all playground and athletic fields
and the municipal ice rink, including those under the jurisdiction of the
School Committee except during the regular school year or at other
times when such facilities are reserved for use for Town of Barnstable
school activities. The Commission further advises and otherwise assists
the Town Manager in establishing rules and regulations for
B.
§ 241-30 WASTEWATER DISCHARGE § 241-31
232:653
§ 241-32. Board of Registrars of Voters.
development, servicing, and delivery of recreational activities in the
Town. The Recreation Commission is an advisory committee of the
Town.
Interrelationships.
Town Council: The Recreation Commission interacts with the Town
Council to advise the Council relative to the establishment of
policies and legislation concerning recreational programming
within the Town. The Commission interacts primarily with the
Council Committee on Human Resources for this purpose.
(1)
Town Manager: The Recreation Commission interacts with the
Town Manager to ensure that rules and regulations concerning
playgrounds, the ice rink, athletic fields, beaches and the
development and delivery of recreational activities are effective.
The Commission receives administrative support from the
Community Services Department for this purpose.
(2)
Other boards: The Recreation Commission interacts with the
Conservation Commission, Sandy Neck Board, Golf Course
Committee, Public Works Commission, Historical Commission, JFK
Memorial Trust Fund Committee, and other boards as necessary.
(3)
C.
Term of office. There shall be a Board of Registrars of Voters consisting
of the Town Clerk and three other persons. Members of the Board shall
be appointed so that they represent the two leading political parties,
and in no case shall an appointment be made as to cause a board to
have more than two members, including the Town Clerk, of the same
political party. Every such appointment shall be made from a list to
be submitted by the Town committee of the political party from the
members of which the position is to be filled, containing the names of
three enrolled members of such party resident in the Town, selected by
a majority vote at a duly called meeting of such committee.
A.
Authorities and responsibilities. The Board of Registrars hold voter
registration sessions, certify the signatures on nomination papers and
petitions, hold hearings and decide disputes over signatures on
nomination papers, prepare an annual list of persons, and all other
duties as cited in MGL Chapter 51. The Board of Registrars is a
regulatory and ministerial committee of the Town.
B.
Interrelationships.
Town Council: Interaction with the Town Council is minimal; the
main function of the Board of Registrars concerns itself with
elective matters. The Council Committee on Ordinances meets with
the Board at its convenience so as to ensure conformity by the
Town with statutory matters concerning elective issues.
(1)
C.
§ 241-31 BARNSTABLE CODE § 241-32
232:654
§ 241-33. Sandy Neck Board.
Town Manager: Interaction with the Manager is primarily in the
form of providing staff assistance through the employment of poll
workers, ballot counters, supervision and facilities for the conduct
of electoral matters.
(2)
Term of office. There shall be a Sandy Neck Board consisting of seven
members. One shall be a member of the Recreation Commission, one
shall be a member of the Conservation Commission, with the other five
members appointed at large. In the event that an insufficient number
of members of such commissions are willing to serve, the Town Council
may appoint any resident to the respective conservation or recreation
seats, and it shall be the duty of members so appointed to communicate
and coordinate the work of the Board with the respective commissions.
A.
Authorities and responsibilities.
The Sandy Neck Board provides the Town Manager with advice
relative to the management, control and jurisdiction of real and
personal property at Sandy Neck, for the purposes of preservation,
conservation, education and passive recreation such as hiking,
horseback riding, swimming, hunting, camping and fishing. The
Sandy Neck Board is an advisory committee of the Town.
(1)
Consistent with the foregoing purposes, the Sandy Neck Board is
authorized to recommend to the Town Manager the adoption of
rules and regulations for the public health, safety and convenience
with respect to the use by the public of Sandy Neck, such
regulations to be adopted only after a public hearing held by the
Town Manager in a manner prescribed by ordinance.90
(2)
B.
Interrelationships.
Town Council: The Sandy Neck Board interacts with the Town
Council to ensure that Town policies and legislation serve to
protect and preserve the natural resources at Sandy Neck. The
Board interacts primarily with the Council Committee on Planning
and Development for this purpose.
(1)
Town Manager: The Sandy Neck Board interacts with the Manager
for the purposes of ensuring that all management, control and
jurisdiction of real and personal property at Sandy Neck, for the
purposes of preservation, conservation, education and passive
recreation is effectively performed. The Board receives
administrative support through the Community Services
Department, Sandy Neck Section of the Recreation Division.
(2)
Other boards: The Board interacts with the Conservation
Commission, Historical Commission, Recreation Commission,
(3)
C.
90.Editor's Note: See Ch. 177, Sandy Neck, and Ch. 601, Sandy Neck Barrier Beach.
§ 241-32 WASTEWATER DISCHARGE § 241-33
232:655
§ 241-34. Scholarship Committee.
§ 241-35. Trust Fund Advisory Committee.
Board of Health, and the Public Works Commission concerning a
variety of activities at Sandy Neck.
Term of office. There shall be a Scholarship Committee consisting of
five members: the Superintendent of Schools or his designee, a member
of the Town Council and three members at large. As Trustee, the Town
Manager shall serve as an ex officio member.
A.
Authorities and responsibilities.
The Scholarship Committee recommends the award of financial aid
in the form of scholarships to Barnstable residents to the Town
Manager, acting in full accordance with the Acts of 1985, Chapter
267, Sections 1 and 2. The Scholarship Committee utilizes, as much
as practicable, the full net income received from the scholarship
fund. The Scholarship Committee is an advisory committee of the
Town.
(1)
In selecting the recipients of financial aid from the Barnstable
Scholarship Fund, the Scholarship Committee is be guided by the
following criteria:
The recipients of financial aid must be residents of the Town
who have been accepted to pursue education beyond the
secondary school level at an institution deemed accredited by
said committee.
(a)
Said committee shall also take into consideration each
recipients financial need, character, scholastic record, and
involvement in community work as well as extracurricular
activities.
(b)
A recipient may be interviewed if deemed necessary by said
Scholarship Committee prior to the award of any financial aid.
(c)
(2)
B.
Interrelationships.
Town Council: The Scholarship Committee interacts with the Town
Council to advise the Council of Scholarship Recipients each year.
The Committee interacts primarily with the Council Committee on
Human Resources for this purpose.
(1)
Town Manager: The Scholarship Committee interacts with the
Town Manager to recommend scholarship fund recipients. The
Manager, as Trustee, shall authorize their award based on the
Committee's recommendations.91
(2)
C.
91.Editor's Note: Original Section 30.00, which immediately followed this section, was
deleted 8-21-1997 by Order No. 97-156.
§ 241-33 BARNSTABLE CODE § 241-35
232:656
§ 241-36. (Reserved)92
§ 241-37. Waterways Committee.
Term of office. There shall be a Trust Fund Advisory Committee
consisting of seven members. Two of the members shall have a
background in finance and government, two shall have a background in
human services, one shall be an attorney with a background in trusts
and estates, one shall be a member of a village civic association, and
one shall be a member at large.
A.
Authorities and responsibilities. The Trust Fund Advisory Committee is
responsible for advising the Town Manager with respect to all issues
which arise relating to the management and administration of the
trusts of the Town, including investments, disbursements, and
compliance with the terms thereof. The Committee may be a resource
to be available to persons who wish to make gifts of money or property
in trust to the Town, to facilitate such gifts. The Committee is an
advisory committee of the Town.
B.
Interrelationships.
Town Council: The Trust Fund Advisory Committee interacts with
the Town Council for the purpose noted. Interaction is primarily
through the Council Committee on Human Resources.
(1)
Town Manager: The Trust Fund Advisory Committee interacts with
the Town Manager for the purpose noted. Interaction is primarily
through held between the Committee and Manager to discuss all
trust activity of the Town. The Town Manager, as Trustee for most
Town trusts, provides direct administrative support to the
Committee.
(2)
C.
Term of office. There shall be a Waterways Committee consisting of five
members: the Town Manager or his or her designee, the Harbormaster
and three resident taxpayers of the Town of Barnstable to be appointed
by the Town Council, for three year terms, so arranged that the term of
one such resident taxpayer members shall expire each year. [Amended
1-20-2005 by Order No. 2005-038]
A.
Authorities and responsibilities.
The Waterways Committee studies, plans and makes
recommendations regarding the development, protection,
maintenance and improvements of the foreshores, jetties,
breakwaters, channels, wharves, bulkheads, docks, piers, slips,
marinas, Town landings, launching ramps and other marine
improvements of interest to the Town. The Waterways Committee
is an advisory committee of the Town.
(1)
B.
92.Editor's Note: Former § 241-36, Water Pollution Control Board, was repealed 7-19-2018 by
Order No. 2018-177.
§ 241-35 WASTEWATER DISCHARGE § 241-37
232:657
§ 241-38. Water Quality Committee.
The Waterways Committee recommends to the Town Manager, the
promulgation of rules, regulations, and fees to be charged for the
use of Town owned waterfront piers, bulkheads, slips and marinas,
for sale of fuel and oil and the furnishing of water or other utilities
or service to boats using Town owned waterfront piers, bulkheads,
slips and marinas.
(2)
The powers and duties of the Waterways Committee shall apply
only to the facilities under the jurisdiction of the Town Manager.
(3)
Interrelationships.
Town Council: The Waterways Committee interacts with the Town
Council to advise the Council on the establishment of policies
and legislation concerning the Town's waterways as noted above.
The Committee interacts primarily with the Council Committee on
Planning and Development for this purpose.
(1)
Town Manager: The Waterways Committee interacts with the Town
Manager for the purpose of providing the Manager with advice
and recommendations concerning rules and regulations relative
to waterways facilities under the jurisdiction of the Manager.
Administrative support shall principally be through the
Harbormaster Division of the Regulatory Services Department.
(2)
Other boards: The Waterways Committee interacts with the
Conservation Commission, Sandy Neck Board, Board of Health,
Recreation Commission and others, in order to seek assurances
that the waterways of the Town are properly protected and
managed as a natural resource.
(3)
C.
Term of office. There shall be a Water Quality Committee consisting of
seven members.
A.
Authorities and responsibilities. The Water Quality Committee is
responsible for providing the Town Manager and Town Council with
advice and information necessary to ensure the protection of the quality
and quantity of water within the Town. It serves as a source of
information to water suppliers, it acts as the Town's liaison on water
issues with other Towns, it provides a forum for resolution of multijurisdictional
concerns and conflicts involving ground- , surface and
coastal water quality and assists in preparation of ordinances and
regulations concerning water quality within the Town. The Water
Quality Committee is an advisory committee of the Town.
B.
Interrelationships.
Town Council: The Water Quality Committee interacts with the
Town Council to advise the Council on those policies and legislative
matters concerning water quality and quantity within the Town.
(1)
C.
§ 241-37 BARNSTABLE CODE § 241-38
232:658
§ 241-38.A. Hyannis Water Board. [Added 1-19-2006 by Order No.
2006-05]
The Committee interacts primarily with the Council Committee on
Planning and Development for this purpose.
Town Manager: The Water Quality Committee interacts with the
Manager primarily by receiving administrative support through the
Planning Department, and additional support through the Public
Works Department and the Regulatory Services Department,
Health and Conservation Divisions.
(2)
Other boards: The Water Quality Committee interacts with the
Zoning Board of Appeals, the Planning Board, the Conservation
Commission, the Board of Health, the Old King's Highway Historic
District Committee, the Historical Commission, the Economic
Development Commission, the Waterways Committee and the
Public Works Commission in furtherance of its responsibilities.
(3)
There is hereby established a Hyannis Water Board, which shall consist
of five members who are ratepayers of Hyannis Water, the water supply
operation administered by and through the Water Supply Division of the
Department of Public Works, appointed by the Town Manager for threeyear
overlapping terms. Two members of said Board will be owners
of Hyannis business property located in Hyannis Water, served by the
Hyannis Water System, and three members of said Board shall be
residents of Hyannis in the area served by Hyannis Water. Said Board
shall be responsible for the oversight of the Water Supply Division of
the Department of Public Works and shall have the authority, subject
to the authority and responsibility of the Town Manager and the Town
Council under the Charter, to: [Amended 10-5-2006 by Order No.
2007-032; 11-17-2011 by Order No. 2012-028]
(1) Review and approve the operating budget for the Division;
Review and approve the capital outlay plan and budget for the
Division;
(2)
(3) Organize itself into subcommittees as needed;
(4) Review and approve the rate schedules for the Division;
Prepare an inventory and master plan for all assets of the Water
Supply Division, including all real and personal property acquired
from the Connecticut Water Company in the course of the
acquisition which will conclude in the year 2006; and
(5)
Make any recommendations to enhance the performance and
operation of the Division which, in its opinion, are appropriate.
(6)
A.
In addition, the Division shall be entitled to, to the extent permissible
by law, having the proceeds of any sale or change of use of property
B.
§ 241-38 WASTEWATER DISCHARGE § 241-38.A
232:659
§ 241-39. Youth Commission. [Added 7-16-1992 by Order No.
92-141; amended 6-12-1997 by Order No. 97-150; 11-4-2004 by
Order No. 2005-030; 4-3-2014 by Order No. 2014-069]
acquired in the acquisition of the Barnstable Water Company by the
Town of Barnstable dedicated to the capital outlay budget of the
Division, debt reduction then to the operation thereof.
The Town Manager shall annually cause a review to be completed with
respect to the provisions of this section of the Administrative Code, and
report on said review to the Town Council.
C.
Composition; term of office. There shall be a Youth Commission
consisting of 15 members, 13 of whom will be between the ages of 13
and 19. These 13 members shall serve for a one-year term and may be
reappointed as long as they continue to qualify, and they will be the only
voting members. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in § 241-8J,
as long as a member is enrolled as a full-time student at a school
located within the Town, or a home school resident student identified
by the Barnstable School Superintendent, s/he does not have to be
a resident of the Town. Two members shall be adults and will serve
for three-year terms, overlapping, as determined by the Appointments
Committee. The two adult members will be nonvoting members and
serve in an advisory capacity. All members appointed shall provide for
a balanced and diverse representation of the community's interests and
concerns. One member of the Youth Commission shall serve as a liaison
to the Town Council, reporting either in person or in writing, as s/he is
able. [Amended 12-17-2015 by Order No. 2016-059]
A.
Authority and responsibilities. The Youth Commission advises and
assists the Town Council and Town Manager in the development of
policies, programs, and delivery of services for the health and welfare
of youth and their families. The Commission shall regularly assess the
needs of youth as individuals and community members and work with
all public and private schools located within the Town as well as the
Community Services Department, Police and other town departments,
multiple-member boards and community groups in coordinating or
developing mutual efforts to address these needs. The Commission
further advises and otherwise assists the Town Manager in utilization
of all federal, state, and municipal programs and services available to
youth and provides education and referral resources to all members of
the community. The Youth Commission is an advisory commission to the
Town.
B.
Interrelationships.
Town Council. The Youth Commission interacts with its Town
Council liaison and the Town Council to advise the Council relative
to the establishment of policies and legislation concerning issues
affecting youth within the Town. The Board interacts primarily with
the Recreation Commission and Golf Commission.
(1)
C.
§ 241-38.A BARNSTABLE CODE § 241-39
232:660
§ 241-40. Road Committee. [Added 9-23-1993 by Order No. 93-130]
Town Manager. The Youth Commission interacts with the Town
Manager to ensure that the development and delivery of youth
and family services are effective. The Commission receives
administrative and staff support from the Department of
Community Services.
(2)
Other boards. The Youth Commission interacts with the Recreation
Commission, Golf Commission, Conservation Commission, Sandy
Neck Board, Public Works Commission, Historical Commission,
J.F.K. Memorial Trust Fund Committee, and other boards as
necessary.
(3)
Term of office. There shall be a Road Committee consisting of six
persons: the Town Manager, one member of the Public Works
Commission, one member from the Historical Commission and one
member of the Planning Board, and two voters of the Town. In addition,
ad hoc members shall be appointed by each village civic association
to act as liaisons with their respective village associations on matters
relating to the taking of private roads. [Amended 3-4-1999 by Order
No. 99-075]
A.
Authorities and responsibilities. The Road Committee shall make
recommendations on all roads being considered for layout and
acceptance within the Town. The Road Committee shall qualify roads
under consideration for layout and acceptance as to their relative
importance within the Town's overall hierarchy of roads providing for
intratown traffic movements and public safety. The Road Committee is
an advisory committee of the Town.
B.
Interrelationships.
Town Council: The Road Committee interacts with the Town
Council for the purpose of advising the Town Council on matters
related to road layout and acceptance policies within the Town.
(1)
Town Manager: The Road Committee interacts with the Town
Manager for the purpose of qualifying roads being considered
by the Town Manager for layout and acceptance. It receives
administrative support from the Public Works Department,
Planning Department and other staff as necessary to accomplish its
purposes.
(2)
Other boards: The Road Committee interacts with the Public Works
Commission, Planning Board, and other municipal boards as
necessary to accomplish its purposes.93
(3)
C.
93.Editor's Note: Original Section 37.00, Government Study Committee, which immediately
followed this section and was added 12-2-1993 by Order No. 94-072-T, was deleted
6-24-1999.
§ 241-39 WASTEWATER DISCHARGE § 241-41
232:661
§ 241-41. Shellfish Committee. [Added 12-1-1994 by Order No.
95-034; amended 3-2-2000]
Term of office.
There shall be a Shellfish Committee consisting of nine members,
which shall be geographically diverse and will be appointed by the
Town Council and shall consist of:
No more than three commercial shellfishermen (one of which
shall be a grantholder).
(a)
(b) No more than three family permit holders.
One person professionally trained in the aspects of
shellfishing.
(c)
(d) No fewer than two members at large.
(1)
One member of the Shellfish Committee shall be the liaison to the
Town Council.
(2)
A.
Authorities and responsibilities. The Shellfish Committee shall be
responsible for reviewing and making recommendations to the Town
Manager and Town Council relative to the control, regulation and/or
prohibition of the taking of eels and any or all kinds of shellfish, sea
worms, and alewives within the Town. The Committee shall annually
review regulations and make recommendations for change not contrary
to law, concerning the times, places, methods, purposes, uses, sizes,
quantities and any other particulars, including a review of fees
associated with the controlling, regulating and propagating of the
Town's shellfisheries. The Committee shall also review and make
written recommendations to the Town Council relative to the issuance
of shellfish aquaculture licenses. The Committee is an advisory
committee of the Town.
B.
Interrelationships.
Town Council: The Committee meets annually, or more frequently
as is necessary, with the Town Council to apprise the Town Council
of issues pertaining to the shellfisheries of the Town in order to
effectuate accomplishment of its mission.
(1)
Town Manager: The committee meets as necessary with the Town
Manager, the Shellfish Constable, the Natural Resources Division
of the Department of Regulatory Services and/or other
administrative staff in order to effectuate accomplishment of its
mission.
(2)
Other boards: The committee meets as necessary with any
multiple-member body of the Town to effectuate accomplishment of
its mission.
(3)
C.
§ 241-41 BARNSTABLE CODE § 241-42
232:662
§ 241-42. Hyannis Main Street Waterfront Historic District
Commission. [Added 10-9-1997 by Order No. 98-022]
Term of office. There shall be a Hyannis Main Street Waterfront Historic
District Commission consisting of seven unpaid members appointed by
the Town Council. The Commission members shall include one member
appointed from two nominees of each of the following organizations:
the Barnstable Historical Commission, the Massachusetts State
Chapter of the American Institute of Architects, and the Cape Cod and
Islands Board of Realtors and four members who are residents and/or
business operators from the district. In the event that no nominations
by one or another of the above-named nominating groups have been
received within 30 days from the date of an invitation to nominate, the
Town Council may make the appointments to the Commission without
such nomination.
A.
Authorities and responsibilities.
The Hyannis Main Street Waterfront Historic District Commission
seeks to promote the educational, cultural, economic and general
welfare of the Town of Barnstable, and the Town's unique
community character through the preservation and protection of
the distinctive characteristics of buildings, structures and places
significant in history and architecture within the boundaries of
the District, and through the preservation, maintenance and
improvement of appropriate settings for such buildings, structures,
and places, and the encouragement of new design which is
compatible with the existing historical and community character,
and through the benefits resulting to the economy of said Town by
preserving and enhancing the amenities and historical aspects of
this district which make Barnstable a desirable place to live and for
tourists to visit. The district includes all of the land as shown within
the boundaries on the Official Map on file with the Barnstable Town
Clerk and recorded at the Barnstable County Registry of Deeds.
(1)
The Commission is an advisory and regulatory commission of the
Town, pursuant to Chapter 40C of the General Laws of the
Commonwealth of Massachusetts, as amended. The Commission
acts in accordance with Chapter 40C and Chapter 112, Historic
Properties, Article III, of the Code of the Town of Barnstable.
The Commission holds hearings. The Commission determines the
appropriateness of exterior architectural features of buildings and
structures to be erected or altered within the district, passes upon
the demolition or removal of buildings or structures or any part
thereof; determines the appropriateness of erection or display of
occupational, commercial or other signs and billboards within the
district wherever a certificate of appropriateness is required.
(2)
B.
C. Interrelationships.
§ 241-42 WASTEWATER DISCHARGE § 241-42
232:663
§ 241-43. Hyannis Main Street Waterfront Historic District Appeals
Committee. [Added 10-9-1997 by Order No. 98-022]
Town Council: The Hyannis Main Street Waterfront Historic
District Commission interacts with the Town Council to ensure
Town policy and legislation of interest to the district is preserved
and enhanced.
(1)
Town Manager: The Hyannis Main Street Waterfront Historic
District Commission interacts with the Town Manager primarily to
receive administration and financial assistance in pursuit of the
Commission's activities. The Commission receives such assistance
through the Historic Preservation Division of the Planning
Department. The Commission further receives enforcement
assistance through the Building Services Division of the Regulatory
Services Department, and other Town agencies as appropriate.
(2)
Other boards: The Hyannis Main Street Waterfront Historic District
Commission interacts with the Zoning Board of Appeals, the
Planning Board, the Conservation Commission, the Board of
Health, the Historical Commission, the Hyannis Main Street
Waterfront Historic District Appeals Committee, the Licensing
Authority, the Public Works Commission and the Economic
Development Commission, in order to effectuate accomplishment
of the Commission's responsibilities.
(3)
Term of office. There shall be a Historic District Appeals Committee
consisting of three unpaid members appointed annually by the Town
Council. The Committee shall include one member, where possible,
from the Hyannis business community, one member, where possible,
who is a resident of Hyannis, and one member, where possible, from the
field of architecture or a related profession.
A.
Authorities and responsibilities. The Historic District Appeals
Committee decides on individual cases brought by persons seeking
relief from a decision of the Hyannis Main Street Waterfront Historic
District Commission. The decision of the Committee shall be
determined by majority vote of the Committee members. If they
determine that the Commission action is unsupported by the evidence,
or exceeds the authority of the Commission, they may annul the
Commission decision, or remand the case for further action by the
Commission. The Historic District Appeals Committee is an advisory
and regulatory committee of the Town pursuant to Section 5-1 of the
Town's Home Rule Charter and Chapter 112, Historic Properties,
Article III, of the Code of the Town of Barnstable, as amended.
B.
Interrelationships.
Town Council: The Hyannis Main Street Waterfront Historic
District Appeals Committee interacts with the Town Council in
matters of policies and legislation concerned with the issues and
(1)
C.
§ 241-42 BARNSTABLE CODE § 241-43
232:664
§ 241-44. Community Preservation Committee. [Added 2-18-1999 by
Order No. 99-063; amended 7-18-2002 by Order No. 2003-005;
1-20-2005 by Order No. 2005-038; 4-7-2005 by Order No. 2005-071]
problems relating to the preservation, protection and development
of aesthetic values within the district.
Town Manager: The Hyannis Main Street Waterfront Historic
District Appeals Committee interacts with the Town Manager and
the administrative organization primarily through the Historic
Preservation Division of the Planning Department, the latter which
serves to interact with all other administrative agencies within the
Town for the purposes of providing professional assistance to the
Committee.
(2)
Other boards: As needed the Hyannis Main Street Waterfront
Historic District Appeals Committee interacts with the Hyannis
Main Street Waterfront Historic District Commission, the Historical
Commission, the Zoning Board of Appeals, the Planning Board,
the Board of Health, the Economic Development Commission, the
Licensing Authority and the Public Works Commission in order the
effectuate accomplishments of the Committee's responsibilities.
(3)
Establishment and term of office. There shall be a Community
Preservation Committee consisting of nine members who shall be
appointed by the Town Council to include the following: one member
of the Conservation Commission; one member of the Historical
Commission; one member of the Planning Board; one member or the
Executive Director of the Housing Authority; and five at-large members.
The Town Council may give consideration to any recommendation from
the members of the Conservation Commission, Historical Commission,
Planning Board and Housing Authority as to the member to be so
appointed. Members of the Community Preservation Committee shall
serve for terms of three years, so arranged that as equal a number as
possible shall expire each year.
A.
Authorities and responsibilities.
Acquisition and preservation.
The Community Preservation Committee shall make
recommendations to the Town Council for the acquisition,
creation and preservation of open space; for the acquisition,
preservation, rehabilitation and restoration of historic
resources; for the acquisition, creation and preservation of
land for recreational use; for the creation, preservation and
support of community housing; and for the rehabilitation or
restoration of open space, land for recreational use and
community housing that is reacquired or created as provided
in MGL c.44A. With respect to community housing, the
Community Preservation Committee shall recommend ,
(a)
(1)
B.
§ 241-43 WASTEWATER DISCHARGE § 241-44
232:665
whenever possible, the reuse of existing buildings or
construction of new buildings on previously developed sites.
The Community Preservation Committee may include in its
recommendation to the Town Council a recommendation to
set aside for later spending funds for specific purposes that
are consistent with community preservation but for which
sufficient revenues are not then available in the Community
Preservation Fund to accomplish that specific purpose or to set
aside for later spending funds for general purposes that are
consistent with community preservation.
(b)
In considering its recommendations, the Community
Preservation Committee shall use as a guideline local and
regional open space plans, housing plans, master plans and the
Local Comprehensive Plan.
(c)
Needs study. The Community Preservation Committee shall study
the needs, possibilities and resources of the Town regarding
community preservation. The Committee shall consult with existing
Town boards, including the Conservation Commission, the
Historical Commission, the Planning Board, and the Housing
Authority, in conducting such studies. As part of its study, the
Committee shall hold one or more public informational hearings
on the needs, possibilities and resources of the Town regarding
community preservation possibilities and resources, notice of
which shall be posted publicly and published for each of two weeks
preceding a hearing in a newspaper of general circulation in the
Town.
(2)
Management. Real property interests acquired with community
preservation funds shall be owned and managed by the Town
unless otherwise specified by vote of the Town Council.
(3)
Interrelationships.
Town Council: The Committee shall meet at least quarterly with
the Town Council to apprise the Town Council of issues pertaining
to acquisition and preservation pursuant to the Community
Preservation Act.
(1)
Town Manager: The Committee meets as necessary with the Town
Manager and all municipal departments and/or other
administrative staff in order to effectuate accomplishment of its
mission.
(2)
Other boards: The Committee meets as necessary with the
Conservation and Recreation Commission and any multiplemember
body of the Town, to effectuate accomplishment of its
mission.
(3)
C.
D. The Committee shall serve without compensation.
§ 241-44 BARNSTABLE CODE § 241-44.1
232:666
§ 241-44.1. (Reserved)94
§ 241-44.2. Problem Properties Appeals Committee. [Added
3-21-2013 by Order No. 2013-069]
Term of office. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in
Chapter 37, Article I, and § 241-8 of the Barnstable Code, there shall
be a committee known as the "Problem Properties Appeals Committee,"
consisting of three unpaid members and up to three alternate members
to be appointed from time to time by the Town Council President upon
the filing of an appeal under § 160-2D of the Barnstable Code. Members
and alternates shall be chosen from the Town's standing committees.
A.
Authorities and responsibilities.
The Problem Properties Appeals Committee decides on individual
cases brought by persons seeking relief from a decision of the
Chief of Police to officially identify a property as a chronic problem
property under § 160-2B(6) and to assess the property owner
penalties under § 160-2C.
(1)
The Committee will formulate its decision in conformance with
Chapter 160, Chronic Problem Properties. The decision of the
three-member panel shall be determined by majority vote of the
Committee. If the Committee finds that the property is not a
chronic problem property, based upon the criteria established
under § 160-2B, the designation shall be removed and any penalties
assessed shall be rescinded. If the Committee finds that the
property is a chronic problem property, it may: uphold the penalty
in its entirety; or reduce the penalty based upon a finding that
the period of time or cost of the assigned police response was
excessive; or abate any portion thereof that has already been paid
based upon a finding that the period of time or cost of the assigned
police response was excessive.
(2)
The Town Council may from time to time designate the committee
as the Committee to hear appeals for other ordinances involving
problem properties.
(3)
B.
Interrelationships.
Town Council: The Problem Property Appeals Committee interacts
with the Town Council in matters relating to the implementation of
its functions under the provision of this section.
(1)
Town Manager: The Problem Property Appeals Committee
interacts with the Town Manager in matters relating to the
implementation of its functions under the provision of this section.
(2)
C.
94.Editor's Note: Former § 241-44.1, Agricultural Commission, added 7-19-2007 by Order No.
2007-166, was repealed 6-21-2018 by Order No. 2018-154.
§ 241-44.1 WASTEWATER DISCHARGE § 241-44.3
232:667
§ 241-44.3. through § 241-44.4. (Reserved)
§ 241-44.5. Land Acquisition and Preservation Committee. [Added
6-2-2005 by Order No. 2005-121]
§ 241-45. Jane Eshbaugh Community Service Award Committee.
[Added 4-18-2002 by Order No. 2002-092]
Term of office. There shall be a Land Acquisition and Preservation
Committee consisting of nine members, who shall be appointed by
the Town Council. Members shall serve for terms of three years, so
arranged that an equal number shall expire each year. Said Committee
shall be geographically diverse whenever possible.
A.
Authorities and responsibilities.
Acquisition.
The Land Acquisition and Preservation Committee shall
recommend to the Community Preservation Board parcels of
land available for acquisition.
(a)
The Land Acquisition and Preservation Committee, in
conjunction with the Town Manager and the Town Council, will
leverage non-CPA funding for purchase of additional land.
(b)
The Land Acquisition and Preservation Committee shall review
conservation restrictions before presentation to the Town
Council for approval.
(c)
The Land Acquisition and Preservation Committee shall be
responsible for keeping the Open Space and Recreation Plan
and open space section of the Local Comprehensive Plan
updated and current.
(d)
The Land Acquisition and Preservation Committee shall be
responsible for implementing the approved Cape Cod
Pathways Plan.
(e)
A member of the Land Acquisition and Preservation Committee
shall serve as the Town’s representative on the Santuit
Preserve Management Committee.
(f)
The Land Acquisition and Preservation Committee shall assist
Town departments in the management of the Land Bank lands
acquired under the Land Bank Act in accordance with the Act
and its provisions
(g)
Nothing in this section shall be construed to alter or change
the responsibilities of the Community Preservation Committee
as prescribed by law.
(h)
(1)
B.
§ 241-44.3 BARNSTABLE CODE § 241-45
232:668
§ 241-45.1. Human Services Committee. [Added 10-20-2005 by
Order No. 2006-017]
Term of office. There shall be a Jane Eshbaugh Community Service
Award Committee consisting of five members who shall serve at large.
A.
Authorities and responsibilities. The Jane Eshbaugh Community Service
Award Committee distributes applications for nominations from which a
person or organization is chosen to receive this award. The award is to
be given to a person or organization in recognition of service to others
in the areas of environmental protection, land conservation, health and
human services, innovative community initiatives, beautification, and
other appropriate areas of community endeavor. Special emphasis is to
be placed on contributions to the community by unsung residents who
work quietly, even to the extent of self-sacrifice, without expectation of
recognition or reward.
B.
Interrelationships. Town Council: The Jane Eshbaugh Community
Service Award Committee interacts with the Town Council to notify the
Council of its choice on an annual basis. The Town Council may assist
the Committee through notification and/or advertisement of nomination
procedures and other related matters.
C.
Composition and term of office. There shall be a Human Services
Committee consisting of seven members, representing Barnstable’s
diverse community. These members should include, but not be limited
to, representatives from human services organizations and
corporations based in the Town of Barnstable, as well as individuals
residing in the Town of Barnstable concerned with human services.
The term of office will be three years, staggered, appointed through
the Town Council Appointments Committee. [Amended 9-2-2010 by
Order No. 2011-007; 6-21-2018 by Order No. 2018-158]
A.
Authority and responsibilities. The Human Services Committee will be
a standing committee serving as an advisory board to the Town Council
and Town Manager, presenting and promoting solutions, including
implementation plans, and coordinating and consolidating efforts with
agencies at the local, regional, and state levels where indicated. The
Committee will assess the health and human service needs of our
community, including, but not limited to, homelessness, and the mental
and physical health of the Town's residents. On a regular basis, but not
less than once a year, the Committee will report to the Town Council
with an assessment of the Town's human condition.
B.
Interrelationships.
Town Council. The Human Services Committee interacts with the
Town Council to advise the Council relative to the establishment of
policies and legislation concerning the human service needs of the
Town's residents.
(1)
C.
§ 241-45 WASTEWATER DISCHARGE § 241-45.1
232:669
§ 241-45.2. (Reserved)95
§ 241-45.3. Water Resources Advisory Committee. [Added 9-3-2015
by Order No. 2016-006]
Town Manager. The Human Services Committee interacts with the
Town Manager to ensure that the development and delivery of
health and human services is effective.
(2)
Other boards. The Human Services Committee interacts with
various boards, committees, and commissions, such as the Housing
Authority, Council on Aging, Disability Commission, Housing
Committee, Recreation Commission, Youth Commission, and other
boards as necessary.
(3)
Purpose of the Committee: to advise the Town of Barnstable on the
completion and implementation of its Comprehensive Water Resource
Management Planning Project, with the goal of protecting and
restoring the Town's fresh and salt water bodies and its drinking water
supplies, in compliance with the Cape Cod Commission's Cape Cod
Area Wide Water Quality Management Plan Update of 2015 (the 208
Plan).
A.
Composition of the Committee.
There shall be a Water Resources Advisory Committee (WRAC)
consisting of 11 members as follows:
Five members shall be appointed by the Town Council so as
to be as geographically diverse as possible so as to represent
all the salt water embayments, freshwater lakes and ponds and
watersheds of the Town of Barnstable.
(a)
Three members shall be appointed by the Town Council as
at-large members who have interest or expertise in matters
related to water quality and wastewater issues.
(b)
Three members shall be Town Councilors, appointed by the
Town Council President. Town Council members shall be full
voting members of WRAC and shall act as liaisons from WRAC
to the Town Council and Town Manager.
(c)
(1)
A liaison to WRAC shall be appointed by the Chair or his/her
designee from each of the following: Board of Health, Conservation
Commission, and Planning Board and from other boards,
committees, commissions as requested by the Town Council.
(2)
B.
Term of office. Town Council members shall be appointed by the Town
Council President to serve at his/her discretion. Other members shall
C.
95.Editor's Note: Former § 241-45.2, Renewable Energy Commission, added 1-21-2010 by
Order No. 2010-065, was repealed 6-21-2018 by Order No. 2018-156.
§ 241-45.1 BARNSTABLE CODE § 241-45.3
232:670
each serve for a term of three years, so arranged that as equal a
number as possible shall expire each year.
Authorities and responsibilities. Assist and advise the Town and
specifically the Director of the Department of Public Works and/or his/
her designee in identifying, prioritizing and reporting to the Town all
Town-wide and site specific strategies which would bring the Town of
Barnstable into compliance with the 208 Plan and any other applicable
regulations for water resources protection.
D.
Interrelationships.
The Town Council. WRAC interacts with the Town Council in
matters of policy and implementation of its functions and
recommendations under the provisions of this section. The Town
Council members of this Committee will regularly report to the
Town Council as a whole. From time to time, the Town Council may
direct the Committee to focus on specific areas of implementation
or other related wastewater, groundwater, surface water and
drinking water matters.
(1)
The Town Manager. WRAC interacts with the Town Manager in
matters relating to staff support and recommendations, funding
and implementation of its functions under the provision of this
section, including but not limited to interaction with other towns,
districts, state and federal agencies and the Cape Cod Commission.
(2)
Other boards, committees and commissions. WRAC meets, as
necessary, with any multiple-member board to effectuate its
purpose.
(3)
E.
§ 241-45.3 WASTEWATER DISCHARGE § 241-45.3
232:671

ARTICLE IV
Municipal Organization
[Amended 9-23-1993 by Order No. 93-111; 5-11-2000; 9-8-2005;
10-20-2005 by Order No. 2006-028; 1-19-2006 by Order No.
2006-057; 6-21-2007 by Order No. 2007-158; 6-21-2012 by Order
No. 2012-140; 5-4-2017 by Order No. 2017-141; 5-4-2017 by Order
No. 2017-142; 3-15-2018 by Order No. 2018-101]
§ 241-46. Offices and standards.
General. The municipal agencies of the Town under the jurisdiction of
the Town Manager are described in this Administrative Code Article
IV. The description of municipal agencies delineates the functions of
each said agency, their authorities and responsibilities and the
interrelationships amongst and between the agencies, the multiplemember
bodies, and the elective organization.
A.
Municipal organization. The municipal agencies of the Town consist of
the office of the Town Manager and the eight municipal departments
under the jurisdiction of the Town Manager. The eight departments and
their respective divisions are as follows:
Administrative Services encompassing Legal, Information
Technology, Human Resources and Finance;
(1)
Community Services encompassing Recreation, Golf and Senior
Services;
(2)
(3) Inspectional Services encompassing Building and Health;
(4) Licensing encompassing Licensing and Weights and Measures;
Marine and Environmental Services encompassing Harbormaster
and Natural Resources;
(5)
Planning and Development, encompassing Regulatory Review,
Comprehensive Planning, Community Development, Economic
Development, Conservation and Parking;
(6)
(7) Police; and
Public Works encompassing Administration and Technical Support,
Highway, Solid Waste, Structures and Grounds, Water Pollution
Control and Water Supply.
(8)
B.
Coordination of department activities.
The Town Manager, department directors, division managers, the
Town Clerk and the Town Collector coordinate administrative and
operational activities by meeting at least biweekly to discuss
departmental activities, seeking coordination of activities to
mitigate duplication of services where possible. These managers
shall develop action programs, evaluate program completion,
(1)
C.
§ 241-46 WASTEWATER DISCHARGE § 241-46
232:673
review management, financial, personnel, and legal issues.
Significant attention shall be made towards coordination of work
programs for quarterly periods, so as to ensure minimal work
disruption and efficient service delivery.
Department directors and division managers shall be accountable
to the Town Manager for the achievement of department and
division activities. Departmental division managers shall meet at
least biweekly with the department director for the purposes
outlined. The department director shall have the authority to
commit departmental staff to work programs and shall call to order
and conduct the departmental division work group meetings.
(2)
The delivery of services to the public and intra-town departments
requires coordination and cooperation amongst the various
departments, divisions and programs within the Town. Managers
shall seek to identify those areas of concern where it is believed
that the various departments and divisions can assist each other in
accomplishment of their mission.
(3)
Multiple-member board coordination.
Those departments that provide administrative support to multiplemember
boards shall do so as appropriations allow. It is an
administrative obligation for the departmental liaison to a board
to regularly and accurately represent to management the multiplemember
board activities, policies and decisions, so as to ensure
efficient implementation of said board activities.
(1)
Board chairmen are encouraged to communicate with the Town
Manager as necessary regarding matters relating to board
activities.
(2)
D.
Elective organization coordination.
The municipal organization provides professional support to
elective organization of the Town primarily through the Town
Manager, School Superintendent and Town Attorney.
(1)
Coordination of report service to the Town Council occurs through
the Town Manager. All departments under the jurisdiction of the
Town Manager shall ensure that the Town Council receives
objective, timely, professional and accurate information upon
request, in order to better assist the Town Council in its legislative
and policy decisionmaking process.
(2)
In order to ensure that the coordination of report service to the
Town Council is effective, the Town Manager shall assume
responsibility for the information transmittal. The procedure for
transmittal of reports from a department to the Town Council is
for information to route through the Town Manager. Requests for
reports or other services from the Town Council to a department
(3)
E.
§ 241-46 BARNSTABLE CODE § 241-46
232:674
§ 241-47. Organization of administration.
The administration of the Town affairs shall be organized as set forth below.
§ 241-47.1. Town Manager.
must be routed through the Town Manager. Information not
transmitted by this process shall lessen the accountability of the
Town Manager in that regard.
Coordination of report service requests to the School Committee
shall similarly be transmitted through the School Superintendent
by any municipal agency.
(4)
Nothing in this section, however, shall be construed so as to deny
to members of the Town Council direct access to information that
is readily available and provided by departments to citizens in the
pursuit of their civic responsibilities or private business, nor shall
staff members be discouraged from providing said information
through formal or informal discourse.
(5)
Purpose. The administration of all Town fiscal, business and municipal
affairs shall be vested in the Town Manager. The Town Manager is the
chief administrative officer of the Town and is responsible to the Town
Council for the proper operation of Town affairs for which the Town
Manager is given responsibility under the Barnstable Town Charter, the
Administrative Code, ordinance, general laws, or vote of Town Council.
A.
Authorities and responsibilities.
The Town Manager appoints all department heads, officers, and
employees, except employees of the School Department, the
airport, and persons serving under officers elected directly by the
voters of Barnstable. Certain appointments made by the Town
Manager are subject to the approval of the Town Council, as set
forth in other chapters of the Code of the Town of Barnstable.
(1)
The powers, duties and responsibilities of the Town Manager shall
include, but are not intended to be limited to, the following:
To supervise, direct and be responsible for the efficient
administration of all officers appointed by the Town Manager
and their respective departments and of all functions for which
the Town Manager is given responsibility under the Barnstable
Town Charter, by ordinance, or by vote of the Town Council.
(a)
To administer, either directly or through a person or persons
supervised by the Town Manager, in accordance with the
Charter, all provisions of general or special laws applicable to
the Town, all ordinances, and all regulations established by the
Town Council.
(b)
(2)
B.
§ 241-46 WASTEWATER DISCHARGE § 241-47.1
232:675
(c) To coordinate all activities of Town departments or agencies.
To attend all regular and special meetings of the Town Council,
unless excused, and to answer all questions addressed to the
Town Manager which are related to matters under the general
supervision of the Town Manager.
(d)
To keep the Town Council fully informed as to the needs of
the Town, and to recommend to the Council for adoption such
measures requiring action by it as the Town Manager deems
necessary or expedient.
(e)
To ensure that complete and full records of the financial and
administrative activity of the Town are maintained and to
render reports to the Town Council as may be required.
(f)
To be responsible for the rental, use, maintenance and repair
of all Town facilities, except those under the jurisdiction of the
School Committee and the Airport Commission.
(g)
To be responsible for the purchase of all supplies, materials,
and equipment, except books and other educational materials
for schools and approve the award of all contracts, except
contracts for educational materials.
(h)
To develop and maintain a full and complete inventory of all
Town-owned real and personal property, manage the Town
insurance policies and provide assistance with the Town's risk
management activities in conjunction with all Town
departments.
(i)
To administer personnel policies, practices, or rules and
regulations, any compensation plan and any related matters
for all Town employees and to administer all collective
bargaining agreements, except for School Department
agreements, entered into by the Town.
(j)
To fix the compensation of all Town employees and officers
appointed by the Town Manager within the limits established
by appropriation and any applicable compensation plan.
(k)
To be responsible for the negotiation of all contracts with
Town employees over wages, and other terms and conditions
of employment, except employees of the School Department
and the Airport Commission. The Town Manager may employ
special counsel to assist in the performance of these duties.
Insofar as they require appropriations, contracts shall be
subject to the approval of the Town Council.
(l)
To prepare and submit an annual operating budget, capital
improvement program and a long-term financial forecast as
provided for in the Barnstable Town Charter.
(m)
§ 241-47.1 BARNSTABLE CODE § 241-47.1
232:676
To keep the Town Council fully informed as to the financial
condition of the Town and to make recommendations to the
Town Council as the Town Manager determines necessary or
expedient.
(n)
To investigate or inquire into the affairs of any Town
department, agency or office.
(o)
To delegate, authorize or direct any employee of the Town to
exercise any power, duty or responsibility which the office of
Town Manager is authorized to exercise, provided that all acts
that are performed under such delegation shall be considered
to be the acts of the Town Manager.
(p)
To perform such other duties as necessary or as may be
assigned by the Charter, by ordinance, or by vote of the Town
Council.
(q)
To manage all Town trusts given or bequeathed for the benefit
of the Town or the inhabitants thereof, unless the donor in
making the gift or bequest shall otherwise provide.
(r)
To prosecute and defend suits, either civil or criminal, in which
the Town in its corporate capacity or any Town officer in his
official capacity is a party or in which its rights, duties and
interest may be the subject of adjudication before any judge,
magistrate, court or tribunal, and, with the advice and consent
of the Town Attorney, to compromise and settle all claims or
suits against the Town if in their opinion such claims cannot
be defended advantageously or successfully. In order to
accomplish such objectives the Town Manager and Town
Attorney will meet with the Town Council at least once a year
to get Council input.
(s)
To be responsible for and have the management of all trust
funds given or bequeathed for the benefit of the Town or the
inhabitants thereof, unless the donor in making the gift or
bequest shall otherwise provide. He or she shall, so far as is
consistent with the terms of the trusts, manage and control the
same, and distribute the income in accordance with the terms
of the respective trusts. He shall keep a record of his activities
with respect to the same, and at the close of each financial year
shall make a report to the Town, showing the total amount of
the funds, and their investments, receipts and disbursements
on account of the same, setting forth in detail the sources of
the receipts and the purposes of the expenditures. In carrying
out the duties assigned hereunder, the Town Manager shall
consult with the Trust Fund Advisory Committee from time to
time as he or she deems necessary or desirable.
(t)
To administer the provisions of MGL c. 44, § 55c, in a manner
which is not inconsistent therewith. In so doing, the Town
(u)
§ 241-47.1 WASTEWATER DISCHARGE § 241-47.1
232:677
Manager shall be aided, in his/her discretion, by a Board of
Trustees appointed by him/her in a manner consistent with
Paragraph (b) of said § 55C. Furthermore, the powers to be
exercised hereunder shall, consistent with Paragraph (c) of
said § 55C, include the exercise of powers thereunder for the
purpose of sound and prudent economic development as well
as the purposes recited in said § 55C.
To serve as a member of the Veterans District Board pursuant
to the provisions of MGL. c. 115, which Board's charge is
to provide aid and assistance to veterans and/or their
dependents, secure appropriate benefits for this service group,
and provide outreach, counseling, medical and other support
services.
(v)
Interrelationships. The Town Manager interacts with the Town Council
on all matters noted above and, as the chief administrative officer
of the Town, interacts as necessary with all other agencies, boards,
and officers of the Town. Descriptions specific to interaction appear
in either the elective, multiple-member appointive or administrative
organization parts of the Administrative Code.
C.
Department heads.
The term "department head" as used in this section shall mean the
following positions:
(a) An Assistant Town Manager.
(b) A Town Attorney.
(c) A Town Accountant/Director of Finance.
(d) A Town Treasurer.
(e) A Police Chief.
(f) A Director of Human Resources.
(g) A Building Commissioner.
(h) A Director of Public Works.
(i) A Director of Community Services.
(j) A Director of Planning and Development.
(k) A Director of Marine and Environmental Affairs.
(l) A Director of Licensing.
(m) A Town Collector.
(1)
Appointments of department heads made by the Town Manager
shall become effective upon approval by the Council. The
(2)
D.
§ 241-47.1 BARNSTABLE CODE § 241-47.1
232:678
§ 241-47.2. through § 241-47.4. (Reserved)
§ 241-47.5. Administrative Services Department.
The Administrative Services Department consists of four subordinate
departments: Legal, Information Technology, Finance and Human
Resources. Through these four subordinate departments, the Department
provides a variety of professional services to all components of the Town.
appointments of all other officers and employees shall be deemed,
for the purposes of Section 4-2 of the Charter, to have been
approved when made by the Manager.
Legal.
Purpose. The purpose of the Office of the Town Attorney is to
provide and/or supervise the provision of all legal services
necessary to the proper conduct of the affairs of the Town.
(1)
Authorities and responsibilities. The responsibilities of the Office
are varied and include the following:
Title examination for all real estate and other real property
interests to be acquired by the Town. Approval of deeds and
other instruments in writing under which the Town acquires
real property interests or real estate possessory interests.
(a)
Draft for execution by any Town official, board, department or
committee by virtue of any special or general authorization:
all deeds, leases, conveyances and releases to be executed in
behalf of the Town; or to convey real estate or real estate
possessory interests; and all contracts, bonds, obligations or
other agreements in writing whereby the Town assumes any
pecuniary, contractual or other liability.
(b)
Draft formal orders, notices, votes, adjudications or decrees
for the taking of lands or interests in lands, in behalf of the
Town, by purchase or eminent domain, for any municipal
purpose and the layout, relocation, alteration or
discontinuance of Town ways.
(c)
Attend all Town Council meetings and, at the request of the
President thereof, advise the Council on questions of law
relating to the subject matter of any matter before the Council
and as to the form of proposed votes or motions or the legality
of any particular action proposed to be taken by the Council.
(d)
Provide legal advice or opinion to all elective or appointive
Town officers, multiple-member bodies, or departments
pertaining to any legal issues in the function of their respective
offices or on any specific question of law in relation thereto.
(e)
(2)
A.
§ 241-47.1 WASTEWATER DISCHARGE § 241-47.5
232:679
Appear and act as Attorney in any suit, action, complaint or
court proceedings for the Town or for any Town officer as
party defendant in his official capacity, or at the request of
such officer and subject to the Town Manager's advice and
consent in his personal capacity solely by reason of official
action in good faith relative to a matter in which the Town in
its corporate capacity has a duty to perform.
(f)
Appear and act for the Town and its officers, boards and
committees before state and county boards and officials,
executive departments and committees of the legislature, in
all proceedings involving the rights, duties or interests of the
Town, subject to the Town Manager's request.
(g)
Give advice and consent to the Town Manager with respect
to the question of whether or not to compromise and settle
pending or threatened claims or suits against the Town or
officers.
(h)
Interrelationships.
Town Council. The Town Attorney interacts with the Town
Council by attending all Town Council meetings and advises
the Council on questions of law relating to the subject matter
of any matter before the Council and as to the form of proposed
votes or motions or the legality of any particular action
proposed to be taken by the Council.
(a)
Town Manager. The Town Attorney shall interact with the
Manager to pursue the responsibilities set forth herein, and
shall serve further to advise the Manager on matters of law and
specific legal functions of the organization.
(b)
Other departments. Interaction shall be consistent with the
responsibilities set forth herein.
(c)
(3)
Information Technology.
Purpose. The objective of Information Technology is to provide
assistance and professional services to all Town departments
utilizing systems for which they are responsible. Significant
attention is given to coordination, integration, standardization and
centralization of the Town's information resources.
(1)
Authorities and responsibilities. Information Technology is
responsible for several major functional areas: systems
development and planning, systems modification and
enhancement, operations, central services and management and
administration of the hardware and software for the geographic
information system, computer hardware acquisition and
maintenance support, software acquisition, development and
enhancement, computer supplies management, binding, printing,
(2)
B.
§ 241-47.5 BARNSTABLE CODE § 241-47.5
232:680
plotting and scanning services, desktop publishing, developing and
conducting in-house computer training, and most significantly,
processing of all municipal software programs on the host
computer system, and central depository for all electronic
information and associated systems which are maintained and/or
utilized by the Town.
Interrelationships.
Town Manager. Regular interaction for the purpose of ensuring
adherence to information systems procedures and practices
by all municipal departments, development and maintenance
of information systems planning, and procurement, and
compliance by all departments to the information systems
policies and procedures for management of information
systems.
(a)
Other departments. Ongoing interaction with all departments
to ensure accomplishment of the respective departments' goals
and objectives is commonplace. Special projects, development
of software and/or hardware enhancements as needed and
as are consistent with management policy on same. Regular
and recurring interaction with all users of information systems
technology by technical support staff and programming and
development staff is commonplace, so as to ensure the
effective and efficient integration of information systems
within the Town.
(b)
(3)
Finance.
Purpose. Finance is responsible for providing financial and internal
support to all municipal departments as well as to the School
Department, providing the general public with departmental
information, providing the Town Council, School Committee, Town
Manager and School Superintendent oversight review, and
improving accessibility to local government and its services.
(1)
Town Accountant and Treasurer appointment. The Town Manager
appoints a Town Accountant, who shall also serve as the Finance
Director. The Town Manager also appoints a Town Treasurer. The
Town Accountant operates pursuant to MGL c. 41, § 55, for the
purpose of maintaining financial records, supervising and
controlling all expenditures of Town funds, supervising a
consolidated financial administrative function in accordance with
MGL c. 71, § 37M, and all related work as required by law. The
Town Treasurer is responsible for receipt of, and disbursement of,
all monies of the Town. The Town Treasurer has all of the other
powers and duties which are given to Town Treasurers by MGL c.
41, §§ 35 through 43A.
(2)
(3) Authorities and responsibilities of Town Accountant.
C.
§ 241-47.5 WASTEWATER DISCHARGE § 241-47.5
232:681
The Town Accountant is responsible for maintenance of all
Town and School insurance policies, trust funds, budget
preparation, and monthly financial reporting of revenues and
expenditures. The Town Accountant examines the books and
accounts of all Town officers, School officers and committees
entrusted with the receipt, custody or expenditure of money,
and all original bills and vouchers on which money has been
or may be paid from its treasury. The Town Accountant verifies
the cash balance of each of such officers and committees by
actual count of the cash and inserts in his annual report his
certificate under oath of the facts so found. Additionally, he/
she causes audits to be made annually of the accounts of the
trustees of any property, the principal or income of which, in
whole or in part, was bequeathed or given in trust for public
uses for the benefit of the Town, or for the benefit of the
inhabitants of the Town, and examines and estimates the funds,
securities and evidences of property held by such trustees.
(a)
The Town Manager, School Superintendent and other officers
authorized to spend money shall approve and transmit to the
Town Accountant as often as practicable but not less than once
a month all bills, drafts, orders and payrolls chargeable to the
respective appropriations of which they have the expenditure.
The Town Accountant shall examine all such bills, drafts,
orders and payrolls, and, if found correct, draws a warrant
upon the treasury for the payment of the same, and the
Treasurer pays no money from the treasury except upon such
warrant approved by the Town Manager. The Town Accountant
may disallow and refuse to approve for payment any claim as
fraudulent, unlawful or excessive, and in such case shall file
with the Town Treasurer a written statement of the reasons for
such refusal.
(b)
The Town Accountant maintains a complete set of books and
the accounts are kept, so far as practicable, in conformity with
the classifications and forms prescribed law.
(c)
The Town Accountant participates actively in the development
and review of all municipal budgets.
(d)
Authorities and responsibilities of Town Treasurer.
The Town Treasurer receives and takes charge of all money
and securities belonging to the Town. In accordance with the
orders of the Town or its authorized officers, the Treasurer
pays out and accounts for all disbursements on behalf of the
Town. The Treasurer is responsible for annually rendering a
true account of all receipts and disbursements.
(a)
The Town Treasurer establishes and maintains an efficient
cash management system, which includes monthly, quarterly
(b)
(4)
§ 241-47.5 BARNSTABLE CODE § 241-47.5
232:682
projections of cash flow and disbursements. The Treasurer
maintains professional investment policies and practices, and,
with the approval of the Town Manager, is authorized to
borrow monies for those projects authorized for funding by
the Town Council. She/he is responsible for maintenance and
operation of the Town's payroll system as well as the benefits
management system, both coordinated with the Human
Resources Department. The Town Treasurer pursues, with the
assistance of the Town Collector and Town Attorney, all tax title
processing.
Organizational components.
Accounting function. This component includes oversight for
all financial transactions of the Town including School and
Enterprise Fund operations. This component maintains a
comprehensive general ledger chart of accounts tracking all
financial activity of the Town and provides expertise in the
areas of accounts payable; sound accounting principles and
techniques for all departments; and various internal and
external financial reporting, including the annual independent
financial audit process and preparation of the Town's
Comprehensive Annual Financial Report. The function
interacts with all departments and many outside organizations.
It provides departments with monthly budget reports,
encumbrance status reports and processes all invoices for the
Town. It conducts routine financial reconciliations with other
Town functions, such as the Treasury, School Department and
Town Collector. This function is responsible for providing all
documentation for the annual audit process, assisting in the
preparation of setting the tax rate, providing information for
certification of free cash and surplus funds, preparing various
state and federal financial reports, training on the Town
financial management system for all departments and other
financial information as the need arises.
(a)
Budget function. This component includes assistance in the
annual development of the capital and operating budgets for
the Town and School. This function monitors the budget and
produces annual financial reports thereupon. This function
also prepares an annual cost of service analysis, a long-term
forecast in accordance with the Town's Charter, performs cost/
benefit analysis, conducts training on the Town's financial
management system for all departments and other special
projects as the need arises.
(b)
Treasury function. The functions of the Treasury include
investment policies, cash management, debt management and
collection of real estate liens. All activities are conducted with
the objective of safeguarding principal, maintaining liquidity to
meet the Town's operating needs while optimizing the yield to
(c)
(5)
§ 241-47.5 WASTEWATER DISCHARGE § 241-47.5
232:683
the fullest extent possible and minimizing risk. This component
is also responsible for producing the Town and School payroll,
wage reporting for Town and School, paying over authorized
deductions to appropriate vendors and making timely payroll
tax deposits. The Treasury also oversees the issuance and
disbursement of all vendor checks and the issuance and
servicing of the Town's bonds.
Procurement function. The procurement function offers
expertise in the procurement of goods and services to the
departments and divisions of the Town to allow for the efficient
expenditure of Town funds in accordance with MGL c. 30B, c.
30 § 39M, and c. 149. The Chief Procurement Officer (CPO)
provides direction in the process of acquiring goods and
services, suggestions for alternative products, using state
contracts to avoid the duplicative bid process, assistance with
surplus property disposal and assistance in managing the
interaction of vendors with the Town.
(d)
Assessing function. Assessing appraises each account or parcel
of taxable property within the Town at its market value, so
as to ensure an equitable distribution of the total tax burden
within the Town. As the organizational component responsible
for providing administrative support to the Board of Assessors,
Assessing is responsible for appraisal of all property, both
real and personal. It is responsible for carrying out its
responsibilities under the Massachusetts General Laws, in
particular Chapter 40, § 56, as it concerns the percentages
of local tax levy for property; Chapter 41, §§ 24, 25, 25A, 26,
27, 28, 29, 30, 30A and 30B, as they concern the relating
powers and duties of the Board, the appointment of Assistant
Assessors, and the oath of office; Chapter 58 relating to the
general provisions of taxation; Chapter 59, relating to the
assessment of local taxation; Chapter 60A, relating to excise
tax on registered motor vehicles; Chapter 60B, relating to
excise tax on boats, ships and vessels; Chapter 61, relating to
classification and taxation of forest land and forest products;
Chapter 61A, relating to assessment and taxation of
agricultural and horticultural land; Chapter 61B, relating to
classification and taxation of recreational land; and Chapter
80, relating to the assessment of betterments.
(e)
Town Clerk. The Town Clerk is an elective officer of the Town.
The mission, authorities and responsibilities, and
interrelationships are described in § 241-5. The Town Clerk
is an integral component within the Town's Administrative
Services Department.
(f)
Town Collector. The Town Collector is currently an elective
officer of the Town. Pursuant to a Charter amendment
approved by the voters, the Town Collector will become an
(g)
§ 241-47.5 BARNSTABLE CODE § 241-47.5
232:684
appointed position when the current incumbent's term of office
expires in 2019. The authorities and responsibilities, and
interrelationships are described in § 241-6. The Town Collector
is an integral component within the Town's Administrative
Services Department.
Interrelationships.
Town Manager. The Town Accountant is responsible for
management of the Town's financial resources. As such, all
matters of a financial nature within the Town shall receive
Town Accountant and Town Manager approval. The Town
Accountant advises the Town Manager on all matters financial,
so as to ensure the proper and efficient financial management
of the Town. The Town Treasurer interacts with the Town
Manager for the purposes herein stated, and further to ensure
that the monies of the Town are properly managed through
sound investment and disbursement practices. The Town
Treasurer shall actively work with the Town Accountant and
Town Manager in the development and review of the process
for all municipal budgets, capital planning and long-term
forecasting.
(a)
Other departments. All organizational components, officers,
boards or committees authorized to collect revenues, or
expend same, interact with Finance for the purposes stated
herein. As indicated, interrelationships shall occur throughout
the Town, where matters of payroll, benefits management or
other treasury or budgetary planning activities take place. As
an integral part of the Administrative Services Department,
financial planning matters within the Division are primary.
(b)
Multiple-member boards. The Finance Division interacts with
the Board of Assessors, Trust Fund Advisory Committee, JFK
Memorial Trust Fund Committee, School Committee and the
Comprehensive Financial Advisory Committee and other
boards and commissions as requested.
(c)
(6)
Human Resources.
Purpose. Human Resources provides information and services that
effectively and economically support the execution and integration
of human resources management decisions, to develop and
implement policies and services to enhance the employment
relationship and provide for optimum organizational effectiveness,
and to maintain the high operating standards for the Town and
School consistent with recognized human resources management
and executive policy.
(1)
Authorities and responsibilities. Human Resources performs the
following duties and responsibilities:
(2)
D.
§ 241-47.5 WASTEWATER DISCHARGE § 241-47.5
232:685
Assure fair treatment of applicants and employees in all human
resources related matters.
(a)
Assist, advise and train management personnel in matters of
job selection and termination, classification, disciplinary action
and management training.
(b)
Assist the Town Manager and Superintendent of Schools in the
collective bargaining process.
(c)
(d) Maintain the Town's human resources management system.
Implement and maintain an affirmative action employment
program for the Town, reporting results regularly to the state.
(e)
Manage the workers' compensation and unemployment
insurance programs.
(f)
Maintain the job classification system, establishing position
descriptions, rates of pay, and hours of work.
(g)
Manage the Town's job selection and recruitment process,
approving postings, and assisting with interviewing
candidates.
(h)
Manage employee health insurance and other benefit
programs.
(i)
Interrelationships.
Town Manager. Human Resources is the primary entity
responsible for management of the Town's human resources.
As such, all human resources policies, directives, rules and
regulations promulgated by the Town Manager shall be
implemented and enforced by Human Resources for all
municipal components.
(a)
Other departments. In any matter concerning management
of the Town's human resources, Human Resources will be
required to interact with municipal and school departments
for the purpose of observing and enforcing the Town's human
resources policies and procedures.
(b)
Multiple-member boards. Human Resources interacts with the
Personnel Advisory Board, the School Committee and the
Barnstable Disability Commission.
(c)
(3)
Hearing Officer.
Mission. The mission of the Hearing Officer is to provide judicious,
expert, fair, impartial and prompt determinations consistent with
applicable provisions of statutory, case and regulatory law upon
questions and causes specifically placed under the Hearing
(1)
E.
§ 241-47.5 BARNSTABLE CODE § 241-47.5
232:686
§ 241-47.6. through § 241-47.9. (Reserved)
§ 241-47.10. Community Services Department.
The Community Services Department provides an array of recreation,
social, leisure time, and informative services to the citizens of Barnstable
that appeal to a wide range of ages and interests.
Officer's jurisdiction, specifically comprehensive permits applied
for under Chapter 9, Article II, of the Code.
Authorities and responsibilities. The Hearing Officer hears
evidence and issues written decisions with respect to the grant or
denial of comprehensive permits under Chapter 9, Article II, of the
Code. The Hearing Officer shall transmit his/her written decision to
the Zoning Board of Appeals. The decision of the Hearing Officer
shall become effective within 14 days of its transmittal to the Board
of Appeals unless reversed by the Board of Appeals; any such
reversal to be made only on the basis that the Hearing Officer's
decision is erroneous as a matter of law.
(2)
Interrelationships.
Town Manager. The Hearing Officer interacts directly with
the Town Manager's office on administrative, budgetary and
broad, general policy issues. The Hearing Officer shall be
independent of the Town Manager with respect to decisions in
specific cases.
(a)
Other departments. The Hearing Officer shall be guided by
precedents established by the Zoning Board of Appeals in
deciding similar cases. The Hearing Officer shall make
recommendations through the Town Manager to the Town
Council with respect to legislation beneficial to the
administration of matters within the Hearing Officer's
jurisdiction.
(b)
Other interactions. The Hearing Officer interacts with
appropriate community agencies, groups and private
enterprise as well as state agencies to seek effective
achievement of goals and objectives.
(c)
(3)
Recreation Division.
Purpose. The Recreation Division is committed to providing safe
and healthy leisure and recreational opportunities of a general and
specialized nature to improve the quality of life in our community
through exceptional and affordable programs and services.
(1)
Authorities and responsibilities. Recreation is responsible for the
development and delivery of a variety of educational, social,
recreational and counseling services to the residents of Barnstable.
(2)
A.
§ 241-47.5 WASTEWATER DISCHARGE § 241-47.10
232:687
The major responsibility is to provide services in a manner that
eliminates duplication of services, maximizes existing personnel
resources, and utilizes a variety of volunteer programs to diversify
the effectiveness of programming. It services the community's
entire population, as well as servicing the visitor (tourism)
population on a seasonal basis.
Organizational components. The Recreation Division administers
four programs to ensure efficient accomplishment of program
objectives with a minimum of duplication. Programs are as follows:
Leisure Services provides and coordinates leisure activities
through programs such as basketball, softball, open gym,
Sunshine, Friday night social, sailing, karate, dance, tennis,
playground program, track and field, baseball, theater, floor
hockey, volleyball, gymnastics, community youth centers, afterschool
soccer, special events and special needs programs.
(a)
Aquatics provide and maintain aquatic services at the 16 Town
of Barnstable beach sites. Services in the aquatic program
include general supervision, operating the gate attendant
program, bathhouse attendants, overseeing the police
program, water safety, and a swim program.
(b)
The Youth Services program is dedicated to creating successful
youth and family services programs through the Hyannis Youth
and Community Center and other municipal and school
buildings. These programs include the Youth Commission and
its Youth Advisory Group, and follow the tenets of America's
Promise: prevention, skills education, caring adults, and
service learning.
(c)
The Hyannis Youth and Community Center program which
operates as an enterprise account provides ice programs and
Youth Center activities. Ice activities include two NHL
regulation ice rinks, one of which is the Lt. Joseph P. Kennedy,
Jr., Memorial Skating Rink and provides a public skating
program, hockey activities and figure skating instruction.
Youth Center activities include a Teen Center and basketball/
volleyball courts and other dry floor activities.
(d)
(3)
Interrelationships.
Town Manager. Recreation interacts with the Town Manager
for the purpose of program approval, budgeting, expenditure,
grant assistance, as well as scheduling of facility use and
coordination.
(a)
Other departments. It interacts with Public Works on a regular
basis to prepare, maintain, and improve facilities. Work order
requests are utilized. The Recreation Director and Public
Works Director, or designee, meet to review facilities
(b)
(4)
§ 241-47.10 BARNSTABLE CODE § 241-47.10
232:688
management issues. Police Department interaction takes place
in scheduling of recreation programs, special details, patrols
public safety and coordination of recreational services with
public safety concerns.
Interaction with the Planning and Development Department
relates to land use for passive and active recreation. School
Department interaction concerns utilization of school gyms,
fields, coordination of special needs activities with the School
Department's Special Needs Division; scheduling activities for
the Hyannis Youth and Community Center and athletic fields,
and beach areas.
(c)
Multiple-member boards. Recreation provides administrative
support to the Recreation Commission and the Youth
Commission, implementing the policies of said committees
through the promulgation of rules and regulations that are
subject to approval by the Town Manager.
(d)
Golf Division.
Purpose. The Golf Division is dedicated to providing, operating
and maintaining affordable, self-supporting public golf facilities,
while protecting them for the future, by maintaining and improving
the courses, buildings, and equipment. Golf course management
strives to provide programs that enrich recreational opportunities,
while being fiscally responsible to the residents and taxpayers of
the Town of Barnstable.
(1)
Authorities and responsibilities. The Golf Division is responsible for
the development and delivery of a variety of educational, social,
and recreational programs for the residents of Barnstable. The
major responsibility is to provide services in a manner that
eliminates duplication of services and maximizes existing
personnel resources. It services the community's golfing population
as it is an enterprise account and the users of the service pay for
the service. It also services the visitor (tourism) population on a
seasonal basis.
(2)
Organizational components. The Golf Division is dedicated to
operating and maintaining an attractive, affordable, and selfsupporting
public golf facility. The two facilities are the Olde
Barnstable Fairgrounds Municipal Golf Course, which is an
eighteen-hole golf course located in Marstons Mills, and the
Hyannis Golf Course, which is also an eighteen-hole golf course
located in Hyannis. The golf component is self-supporting through
an enterprise account. It is responsible for all aspects of operating
the golf course. The primary services are as follows:
Membership offers residents the opportunity to play yearround
golf at a reasonable rate. It provides the players with
(a)
(3)
B.
§ 241-47.10 WASTEWATER DISCHARGE § 241-47.10
232:689
organized events, scheduled activities and a sense of belonging
to a top golf facility.
Junior golf provides the Barnstable youth with affordable
recreation, trains the juniors in the rules, etiquette, and swing
technique, provides a home for the high school golf team,
plus tournaments, clinics and competitions of various kinds are
organized throughout the season.
(b)
Fee players are provided with a quality service, a high level
of conditioning, and a pace of play attracting visitors from
all parts of New England to make the Olde Barnstable
Fairgrounds and the Hyannis Golf Course their choice of
courses. Combined, the courses are open to the public seven
days a week, year round.
(c)
Pro shops at both courses consist of a full line of equipment,
fashions, and accessories that are always stocked.
(d)
Driving ranges offer the serious golfer an area to practice all
parts of the game.
(e)
Maintenance provides continuous improvements of each
course. The condition of each course is essential to its future.
Cooperative efforts with conservation, Audubon and other
environmental groups will improve public relations. A
beautification program to improve the aesthetic value of the
facility is ongoing.
(f)
A tournament schedule provides high-quality events for
members, local charities, and state and local associations.
(g)
Restaurants provide food and beverages for customers prior,
during, and after golfing. It also offers non-golfers an
opportunity to visit the facility and enjoy the scenery. Full
service banquet services and large function room provide
community space for wedding receptions, corporate events,
dinner parties, business luncheons and class reunions.
(h)
Interrelationships.
Town Manager. The Golf Division interacts with the Town
Manager for the purpose of program approval, budgeting,
expenditure, as well as scheduling of facility use and
coordination.
(a)
Other departments. It interacts with Recreation on a regular
basis to prepare, maintain, and improve programs.
(b)
Interaction with the Planning and Development Department
relates to land use for passive and active recreation. Interacts
with Finance, Procurement and Treasurer's office on a
frequent basis.
(c)
(4)
§ 241-47.10 BARNSTABLE CODE § 241-47.10
232:690
Multiple-member boards. The Golf Division provides
administrative support to the Golf Committee, implementing
the policies of said Committee through the promulgation of
rules and regulations that are subject to approval by the Town
Manager.
(d)
Senior Services Division.
Purpose. The Senior Services Division supports older adults in
our community by providing programs and services designed to
optimize their quality of life and help them maintain their
independence so they may successfully age-in-place in the Town of
Barnstable. Senior Services assesses the needs of citizens age 60
and over and develops programs to meet those needs, advocates
and educates the community on issues affecting the elderly, and
enlists support and funding for the programs from federal, state,
Town, and other public and private organizations.
(1)
Authorities and responsibilities. Senior Services provides a wide
and diverse array of programs designed to meet the needs of
elders that includes, but is not limited to, the following: community
outreach, health and wellness education and assistance, supportive
day, social, recreational and educational programming, benefits
counseling, information and referral, caregiver support, nutrition,
and transportation. Services are developed and provided through
staff, volunteers and cooperative efforts with community groups
and agencies. It also serves as a resource to other departments and
community groups concerning issues having an impact on elders,
as well as regularly assessing needs and developing financial
resources.
(2)
Interrelationships.
Town Manager. Senior Services interacts with the Town
Manager primarily for program approval, budget
expenditures, secondarily and for all other appropriate
matters.
(a)
Other departments. Senior Services interacts with Public
Works relative to facilities program preparation, maintenance,
and improvement. It interacts with the Health Division for
cooperation in providing appropriate health services. Ongoing
interaction with all other departments and organizational
components to ensure accomplishment of its goals and
objectives is commonplace.
(b)
Multiple-member boards. Senior Services provides
administrative support to the Council on Aging and receives
advisory information regarding program service delivery.
(c)
Other interactions. Senior Services interacts with appropriate
community agencies and groups as well as state and regional
(d)
(3)
C.
§ 241-47.10 WASTEWATER DISCHARGE § 241-47.10
232:691
§ 241-47.11. through § 241-47.20. (Reserved)
§ 241-47.21. Inspectional Services Department.
The Inspectional Services Department, under the direction of the Building
Commissioner, provides efficient and effective public health and public
safety services that meet the needs of the community.
agencies to seek effective accomplishment of the departmental
programming.
Communications.
Purpose. The Communications Division oversees the day-to-day
operations of the Community Services Department and provides
media and communication strategies for the Town to provide the
Town's residents and visitors with timely and accurate information
relative to municipal government.
(1)
Authorities and responsibilities. The Communications Division
provides a wide and diverse array of programs designed to meet
the needs of the community that includes government, education
and public access television which operates as an enterprise
account, through the Public Information program provides
management of the Town's website, weekly and monthly
newsletters, press releases, social media and other communication
channels. Through the Community Relations programs offers
services developed and provided through staff, volunteers and
cooperative efforts with community groups and agencies. It also
serves as a resource to other departments concerning media
issues.
(2)
Interrelationships.
Town Manager. The Communications Division interacts with
the Town Manager primarily for the dissemination of
information to the public, program approval and budget
expenditures.
(a)
Other departments. The Communications Division interacts
with all Town departments for the dissemination of information
to the public.
(b)
Multiple-member boards. The Communications Division
provides administrative support to the Cable Television
Advisory Committee and interacts with other boards as
necessary.
(c)
Other interactions. The Communications Division interacts
with appropriate community agencies and groups to seek
effective accomplishment of departmental programming.
(d)
(3)
D.
§ 241-47.10 BARNSTABLE CODE § 241-47.21
232:692
Building Services Division.
The Building Services Division administers and enforces all federal,
state and local laws, rules, regulations, codes and policies
concerning the construction and maintenance of buildings within
the Town of Barnstable, including specialized codes, such as
wiring, plumbing and gas pipe construction, and installation within
the Town. The Building Services Division is responsible for the
administration and enforcement of the Town's Zoning Ordinance96
for the purpose of protecting the resident's public health, and
safety, and peaceful use of property within the Town's zoning
districts.
(1)
Authorities and responsibilities. The Building Services Division
conducts inspections, issues such permits and enforces such
regulations and ordinances as may be required by the Town or
under the State Building, Wiring, Plumbing, and Gas and State
Accessibility Codes. Through the Building Commissioner, it
enforces all the provisions of the Zoning Ordinance, and further
enforces all the provisions of the Old King's Highway Historic
District rules. It operates pursuant to MGL c. 143, 142, 302, Acts
of 1973, Chapter 470, CMR 248, 521, and 780; and NFPA 54 and
58; the Town Zoning Ordinance and Town general ordinances. It
provides administrative support to noncriminal citations issued by
the Town agencies, except motor vehicle infractions.
(2)
Interrelationships.
Town Manager. The Building Services Division interacts with
respect to program approval, budget, expenditures, as well as
enforcement activities of relevant federal, state and local laws,
rules, regulations, and codes and policies laws.
(a)
Other departments. The Building Services Division has
extensive interaction with other divisions and departments.
On a recurring basis, the Building Services Division interacts
with most municipal organizational components in pursuit of
its objectives.
(b)
Multiple-member boards. Assistance is further provided to the
Disability Commission and the Zoning and/or Planning Boards
as well as the Historic District Committee as needed.
(c)
Other interactions. The Building Services Division consults and
coordinates with Massachusetts State Building, Wiring,
Plumbing, Gas and the Architectural Access Board (AAB)
Accessibility Inspectors as well as with their respective boards
and state agencies where necessary.
(d)
(3)
A.
B. Public Health Division.
96.Editor's Note: See Ch. 240, Zoning.
§ 241-47.21 WASTEWATER DISCHARGE § 241-47.21
232:693
Purpose. The Public Health Division seeks to preserve and maintain
the Town's public health standards and protect its environmental
resources by educational means and through the strict
administration and enforcement of various public health related
federal, state and local laws, rules, regulations, codes and policies
regulations, ordinances, state codes and general and federal laws
through the efficient and effective efforts of divisional personnel.
(1)
Authorities and responsibilities. The Public Health Division's
responsibilities are varied and include the following:
(a) Provides administrative support to the Board of Health.
Administers and enforces laws and regulations concerning
communicable diseases; immunization and vaccination of
residents; provides health promotion clinics, investigation of
all health-related complaints; action and reporting concerning
premature-born infants; funeral directors and body art.
(b)
Administers and enforces laws and regulations concerning
fresh water and wastewater, including: septic system
installations, septage hauler, observation of test holes and
percolation tests; disposal works construction, disposal works
installer license; well construction installation and well
destruction/removal.
(c)
Administers and enforces laws and regulations concerning
pollution control, including: groundwater protection; for
benefit of drinking water supply; wetlands protection, the
protection of surface waters and shellfish resources from
contamination; fuel and chemical storage systems regulations;
inspect establishments possessing hazardous and/or toxic
waste; garbage hauling.
(d)
Administers and enforces laws and regulations concerning
periodic inspections, including: inspections of food
establishments, swimming pools, year-round and seasonal
rental units, saunas, horse stables.
(e)
Administers and enforces laws and regulations concerning
licensing, permitting and inspection of food establishments.
Duties include: issuance of all licenses and permits in relation
to food establishments, including retail food, continental
breakfast, frozen dessert, mobile food units.
(f)
Licenses and inspects hotels, motels, camps, lodging houses
and bed-and-breakfast establishments.
(g)
(2)
Interrelationships.
Town Manager. The Public Health Division interacts with
respect to program approval, budget, expenditures, as well as
(a)
(3)
§ 241-47.21 BARNSTABLE CODE § 241-47.21
232:694
§ 241-47.22. through § 241-47.28. (Reserved)
§ 241-47.29. Licensing Department.
enforcement activities of relevant federal, state and local laws,
rules, regulations, codes.
Other departments. The Public Health Division has extensive
interaction with other divisions and departments. On a
recurring basis, the Public Health Division interacts with most
municipal organizational components in pursuit of its
objectives.
(b)
Multiple-member boards. The Public Health Division interacts
with the Board of Health primarily to provide administrative,
clerical, and technical support relative to promulgation of
regulations and variance request reviews. Additionally, the
Public Health Division reports on interpretation and
implementation of Board of Health regulations and policies
relating to compliance levels and public and environmental
health problems and concerns.
(c)
Purpose. The Licensing Department seeks to protect the public interest
through enforcement of laws and regulations relating to licensing and
weights and measures of certain businesses.
A.
Authorities and responsibilities.
The Licensing Department operates pursuant to applicable
provisions of the Town Code and the following state laws: MGL
Chapters: 94, 95, 96, 97, 98, and 99 concerning weights and
measures; MGL c. 100 concerning auctions; MGL Chapters 136,
138, and 140 concerning licensing.
(1)
The Licensing Department provides administrative support,
conducts inspections and compliance activities, and enforces laws
and regulations regulating business entities licensed by the Town
Manager and the Licensing Authority.
(2)
Licensing Department is responsible for code compliance and
enforcement of all laws pertaining to the sale of commodities by
weight or measure, the inspection and testing of weighing and
measuring devices, the operation and use of electronic retail
checkout systems, the method of sale of commodities and the
labeling of prepackaged commodities.
(3)
B.
Interrelationships.
Town Manager. The Licensing Department interacts concerning
administrative support, code compliance and enforcement of all
licensing and issues relating to weights and measures, private
(1)
C.
§ 241-47.21 WASTEWATER DISCHARGE § 241-47.29
232:695
§ 241-47.30. (Reserved)
§ 241-47.31. Marine and Environmental Affairs Department.
parking lots, narrative bus tours, outdoor dining, taxicabs and
pedicabs.
Other departments. The Licensing Department interacts with the
Police, Planning and Development, Inspectional Services,
particularly as concerns licensing activities, and provision of
measurement devices for various purposes. Other interaction is
with the Town Clerk, Public Works and Tax Collector in provision of
licensing and measurement devices activities for various purposes.
(2)
Multiple-member boards. There may be basic interaction of the
Licensing Department with various boards and committees with
concurrent jurisdiction, such as Site Plan Review, Board of Health
and Zoning Board of Appeals, in addition to full administrative and
compliance support for the Licensing Authority.
(3)
Purpose. The Marine and Environmental Affairs Department provides
services intended to protect the safety of people and vessels that use
Town waterways and waterside facilities, to provide for the protection,
preservation, and enhancement of the Town's natural resources,
including Sandy Neck, and to address animal control issues that
threaten the health, welfare, and quality of life of our citizens.
A.
Authorities and responsibilities. Marine and Environment Affairs is
responsible for enforcement and promulgation of mooring regulations,
marina rules and regulations subject to approval of the Town Manager,
the federal Clean Water Act, 333 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq. (in conjunction
with the United States Coast Guard) and Town ordinances concerning
vessel use in public waters; enforcement of state boating laws; the
placement and maintenance of the Town's private aids to navigation;
approval of moorings; slip contracts and supervision of four Town
marinas which operate as an enterprise account; inspection of Town
ways to water; harbor patrols; and collection of fees and charges at
various marinas, ramps, and for mooring permits. Public safety
activities include the placement and maintenance of aids to navigation,
compliance activities, emergency response activities and technical
assistance to the Waterways Committee. It is responsible for the
administration of programs and the enhancement and protection of
resources relative to the Town property at the Sandy Neck Beach
Park which operates as an enterprise account; programming relative
to shellfish protection, propagation, and management pursuant to MGL
c.130; implementation of conservation land management plans; herring
run management; and provides assistance to federal, state, and other
local agencies in projects of mutual concern. It enforces statutes (MGL
c. 90B, §§ 130, 131; MGL c. 266, § 113; and MGL c. 270, § 16),
ordinances, rules and regulations relative to shellfish, fish and game,
B.
§ 241-47.29 BARNSTABLE CODE § 241-47.31
232:696
marine and recreational vehicles, conservation regulations, illegal
disposal and taking of timber, berries, etc. It is responsible for
answering complaints or other matters pertaining to animals within the
Town; enforcement of all laws relating to the care, custody and control
of dogs, pursuant to MGL c.140, § 136S through § 174; MGL c. 266,
§ 47; and MGL c. 272, § 77 through § 98; and Chapter 24, Animals,
Article I, Regulation of Dogs, of the Code of the Town of Barnstable.
Organizational components.
Harbormaster Division. The Harbormaster Division is responsible
for administration and management of the Town waterways safety
program, mooring program, and marina program, including daily
supervision of Town docks, moorings, boat ramps and Town waters.
Each program promotes public safety for persons and property on
the waterways and attempts to balance uses of limited resources.
(1)
Natural Resources Division. The Natural Resources Division is
responsible for the protection, preservation, management and
enhancement of the Town's natural and wetland resources as well
as the promotion of public safety for persons, property and animals.
Programs include Natural Resources, Shellfish, Sandy Neck Beach
Park and Animal Control. The Natural Resources Program is
responsible for the protection and enhancement of the Town's
natural resources, enforcement of laws relating to fish and game,
marine and recreational use, land management and environmental
laws. The Shellfish Program provides protection and enhancement
of the Town's shellfish resources, including propagation and
stocking projects. The goal of the Sandy Neck Program is to
provide recreational opportunities and access to our Town's
citizens and visitors while protecting the natural, cultural, and
historic resources on Sandy Neck so that a long-term, sustainable
balance between use and conservation of these resources is
achieved. Animal Control addresses animal control issues that
threaten the health, welfare, and quality of life of our citizens.
(2)
C.
Interrelationships.
Town Manager. Marine and Environmental Affairs interacts with
the Town Manager with respect to approval of rules and
regulations relative to moorings and marinas, fees and charges
resulting therefrom, and approval of rules and regulations,
including, but not limited to, shellfish regulatory matters, fish and
game, and all fees and charges resulting therefrom. Interaction
further occurs relative to implementation of the Town's property
and facilities management plan, approval of programs, budgets,
expenditures, and other programs as necessary. Interaction also
occurs through the Town Manager's responsibilities pursuant to
state law and local ordinance concerning restraining orders, and
disposition of dangerous dogs.
(1)
D.
§ 241-47.31 WASTEWATER DISCHARGE § 241-47.31
232:697
§ 241-47.32. through § 241-47.35. (Reserved)
§ 241-47.36. Planning and Development Department.
Purpose. The purpose of the Planning and Development Department is to
preserve the character of the seven villages and improve the quality of
life for Town residents by developing and implementing comprehensive
land use strategies while promoting consistent, current, and sustainable
community and economic development practices through a commitment
to citizen engagement and the interdisciplinary coordination of municipal
departments. The Department is comprised of six programs: Regulatory
Review, Comprehensive Planning, Community Development, Economic
Development, Conservation and Parking Management.
Other departments. Marine and Environmental Affairs interacts
with Conservation on waterway-related project applications and
implementation of conservation land management plans, and land
use; Recreation to maintain passive recreational facilities and
placement of recreational devices; Public Works for land
management maintenance and maintenance of Town landings,
vehicle maintenance, and equipment use, erosion control projects,
snow fence construction, building maintenance, mapping, GIS;
Police for law enforcement issues concerning complaint
investigation, abandoned/recovered motor vehicles, land search/
rescue operations; Fire Districts for search and rescue operations,
underwater search/recovery; Fire Districts and Health Division for
oil spill cleanup and pollution response and investigation; Health
Division for animal bites and quarantines; and Town Clerk for
census, dog licensing matters and public records requests;
Assessing and Collector concerning mooring permit issuance/boat
excise tax; Information Technology for mapping and GIS, and any
other department as may be needed from time to time.
(2)
Multiple-member boards. It provides administrative and technical
support to the Waterways Committee, to the Shellfish Committee,
and to the Sandy Neck Board and interacts with the Conservation
Commission, Recreation Commission, and other boards as
necessary.
(3)
Regulatory Review.
Purpose. The Regulatory Review Program provides professional
planning advice and services to Town residents, the Town Manager
and Town boards, commissions, committees and departments and
assists in the implementation of the Town's ordinances and
regulations relating to land use.
(1)
Authorities and responsibilities. The Regulatory Review Program
provides staff support, technical assistance and clerical services to
the Planning Board, Zoning Board of Appeals, Old King's Highway
Historic District Committee, Historical Commission, and Hyannis
(2)
A.
§ 241-47.31 BARNSTABLE CODE § 241-47.36
232:698
Main Street Waterfront Historic District Commission and Appeals
Committee and provides general advice and assistance on day-today
zoning, planning and historic issues to the public and other
Town entities.
Interrelationships.
Town Manager. The Regulatory Review Program interacts
directly with the Town Manager's office, primarily through
the Assistant Town Manager, who provides direction and
supervision.
(a)
Other departments. In addition to the interdisciplinary
approach and interrelationships which exist between the
programs in the Planning and Development Department,
interrelationships commonly exist with the Public Works, Legal
and Inspectional Services Departments.
(b)
Multiple-member boards. The Regulatory Review Program
interacts with the Planning Board, Zoning Board of Appeals,
Historical Commission, Old King's Highway Historic District
Committee, Hyannis Main Street Waterfront Historic District
Commission and Appeals Committee, Conservation
Commission, Board of Health and other boards and
commissions as requested.
(c)
(3)
Comprehensive Planning.
Purpose. The Comprehensive Planning Program is responsible for
identifying, analyzing and planning for the Town's long-term needs
as they relate to population and demographic trends, commercial
and economic development, the preservation and enhancement
of natural and historic resources and the provision of adequate
public facilities and infrastructure, with the goal of recommending
strategies, plans and legislation to promote sustainable
development.
(1)
Authorities and responsibilities. The Comprehensive Planning
Program performs long-term professional planning for the Town,
including the drafting of amendments to the zoning and general
ordinances, the coordination of intergovernmental activities
relating to planning issues, performing grant administration, and
coordination of the Town's local comprehensive plan. In carrying
out these duties it:
Provides the Town with relevant data concerning its physical,
social, economic and environmental future;
(a)
Advises and assists all Town departments and agencies in the
administration of their respective municipal functions and
responsibilities as they relate to Town planning;
(b)
(2)
B.
§ 241-47.36 WASTEWATER DISCHARGE § 241-47.36
232:699
Initiates and conducts studies of the resources and needs of
the Town and its relationship with other towns in Barnstable
County and its environs;
(c)
Prepares plans and recommendations with regard to land use,
population patterns and projections, siting of public works
projects, economic development, and related matters;
(d)
In conjunction with the other programs within the Planning
and Development Department, analyzes proposals for housing,
transportation, employment, public utility developments,
recreation, parking and traffic circulation and related matters
to assist the Town Manager and other Town agencies in the
making of any recommendations, or rendering of any
approvals, which they may be required to make concerning
such matters;
(e)
Distributes reports or plans in connection with planning and
development issues, problems, policies and strategies;
(f)
Coordinates with the Regional Planning Organization and
other planning agencies of neighboring communities and other
agencies and groups;
(g)
Represents the Town to the Regional Planning Organization,
recording and transmitting all municipal referrals of
developments of regional impact, districts of critical planning
concern, the Regional Policy Plan, coordinating the review
of potential regional referrals through a management level
review team working in conjunction with Inspectional Services
and Public Works;
(h)
Drafts, maintains, and updates the Local Comprehensive Plan
(LCP) of the Town, including data and analyses, maps, surveys,
and plans affecting the components of the Comprehensive
Plan; goals, objectives, policies and strategies that implement
the Comprehensive Plan; and coordination of functions and
activities consistent with the Comprehensive Plan;
(i)
Provides a wide array of data and analysis as part of the
planning process. This data is coordinated with other Town
departments to ensure that projects, functions and activities
are consistent with the goals, policies, and strategies of the
LCP; and
(j)
(k) Reviews state MEPA filings.
Interrelationships.
Town Manager. The Comprehensive Planning Program
interacts directly with the Town Manager's office, primarily
(a)
(3)
§ 241-47.36 BARNSTABLE CODE § 241-47.36
232:700
through the Assistant Town Manager, who provides direction
and supervision.
Other departments. In addition to the interdisciplinary
approach and interrelationships which exist between the
programs in the Planning and Development Department,
interrelationships commonly exist with Public Works, Legal,
and Inspectional Services Departments.
(b)
Multiple-member boards. Comprehensive Planning interacts
with the Planning Board, Zoning Board of Appeals, Historical
Commission, Old King's Highway Historic District Committee,
Hyannis Main Street Waterfront Historic District Committee
and Appeals Committee, Conservation Commission and Board
of Health and other boards and commissions as requested.
(c)
Outside agencies. Significant interrelationships exist between
the Regional Planning Organization concerning regional policy
planning, developments of regional impact, districts of critical
planning concern, and other regional issues. Extensive
interaction occurs with respect to the Executive Office of
Energy and Environmental Affairs and its subsidiary land use
and regulatory agencies, and other agencies as appropriate.
(d)
Community Development.
Purpose. The objective of the Community Development Program is
to provide leadership and expertise working with the community
to assess housing needs, including the implementation of a
comprehensive affordable housing plan for the residents of the
Town. The Community Development Block Grant Program supports
the provision of housing, economic opportunities, and a suitable
living environment for low-income and special-needs populations.
(1)
Organizational components.
Community Development Block Grant (CDBG). The Town,
through the federal Community Development Block Grant
Program, receives funds annually from the United States
Department of Housing and Urban Development and Economic
Development. The Community Development Program oversees
the Town's allocation of these funds based upon the Five-
Year Consolidated Plan and the annual action plans developed
under United States Department of Housing and Urban
Development regulations.
(a)
Accessory Affordable Apartment Program (AAAP).
Administration and monitoring of the AAAP, a component of
the Town's affordable housing plan. The main objective of this
program is to use existing housing to provide safe, legal and
affordable housing units utilizing the Chapter 40B
comprehensive permit process.
(b)
(2)
C.
§ 241-47.36 WASTEWATER DISCHARGE § 241-47.36
232:701
Housing acquisition. Assists eligible public, quasi-public and
private entities, such as the Barnstable Housing Authority,
local nonprofit organizations, and private individuals to
purchase existing housing units in order to maintain the units
at affordable rents.
(c)
Development of municipally owned vacant land. Identifying
municipally owned parcels of land that may be suitable to
develop affordable housing to provide further affordable
housing opportunities for Barnstable residents.
(d)
Development of privately owned land. Working with and
providing technical assistance to private developers engaged
in obtaining the necessary permits in order to provide
affordable housing which meets the goals and objectives of the
Town's Affordable Housing Plan.
(e)
Interrelationships.
Town Manager. The Community Development Program
interacts directly with the Town Manager's office, primarily
through the Assistant Town Manager, who provides direction
and supervision.
(a)
Other departments. In addition to the interdisciplinary
approach and interrelationships which exist between the
programs in the Planning and Development Department,
interrelationships commonly exist with Public Works, Legal
and the Inspectional Services Department.
(b)
Multimember boards. Interaction with the Housing Committee,
Planning Board, Zoning Board of Appeals and the Hyannis
Main Street Waterfront Historic District Commission.
(c)
Other interactions. Community Development interacts with
appropriate community agencies, groups and private
enterprise as well as state agencies to seek effective
accomplishment of goals and objectives.
(d)
(3)
Economic Development.
Purpose. The Economic Development Program provides the
leadership and expertise to develop and implement a
comprehensive economic development plan based upon the
economic development policies outlined in the Local
Comprehensive Plan. In addition, the program aims to enhance
and enrich the quality of life for the Town's residents through
the coordination, enhancement and promotion of arts and culture
activities.
(1)
(2) Organizational components.
D.
§ 241-47.36 BARNSTABLE CODE § 241-47.36
232:702
Business development, retention and outreach. Activities
providing business assistance, permitting guidance, and
access to resources to encourage and promote business
development and job creation. Supports opportunities for
permit streamlining and zoning modernization in response to
the needs of businesses.
(a)
Outreach and Marketing. Promotes the Town of Barnstable
as a premier location for business growth and expansion by
supporting growth in key economic sectors; education and
workforce development; and collaborative workspace/business
incubators fostering scale-up business opportunities.
(b)
Downtown Hyannis Growth Incentive Zone. Various activities
to assist in promoting revitalization efforts include providing
staff support for the implementation of the Downtown Hyannis
Growth Incentive Zone Strategic Plan as well as proposing
methods for addressing related traffic and parking issues.
(c)
Incentive programs. Promote access to local, state and federal
incentive programs, including providing technical support and
monitoring for the Economic Development Incentive Program,
a state program that allows municipalities to provide tax
incentives to new and existing businesses that make capital
investments in their real estate and create jobs.
(d)
Arts and culture. This activity recognizes arts and culture as
a key economic driver for both the year-round and seasonal
economies and as a medium to enrich the quality of life for
the Town's residents. The arts and culture program seeks to
increase access to the arts, enliven public spaces, and continue
to enhance the Town's status as a cultural destination through
the implementation of innovative and diverse arts programs.
(e)
Interrelationships.
Town Manager. The Economic Development Program interacts
directly with the Town Manager's office, primarily through
the Assistant Town Manager, who provides direction and
supervision.
(a)
Other departments. In addition to the interdisciplinary
approach and interrelationships which exist between the
programs in the Planning and Development Department,
interrelationships commonly exist with the Public Works,
Legal, and Inspectional Services Departments.
(b)
Multimember boards. Interaction with the Planning Board,
Zoning Board of Appeals, Barnstable Economic Development
Commission, Cultural Council, Historical Commission and the
Hyannis Main Street Waterfront Historic District Commission.
(c)
(3)
§ 241-47.36 WASTEWATER DISCHARGE § 241-47.36
232:703
Other interactions. The Economic Development Program
interacts with the Hyannis Main Street Business Improvement
District, the Greater Hyannis Area and Cape Cod Chambers
of Commerce, the Regional Planning Organization, community
agencies, groups and private enterprise as well as state
agencies to seek effective accomplishment of goals and
objectives.
(d)
Conservation.
Purpose. The Conservation Program seeks to protect wetland and
watershed resources and to set management direction for
municipal properties held for conservation purposes.
(1)
Authorities and responsibilities.
The Conservation Program serves the Conservation
Commission through the implementation of two primary
objectives: regulatory and land management.
With respect to regulatory matters, it administers and
implements the State Wetland Protection Act (MGL c. 131,
§ 40) and the Town Wetland Protection Ordinance
(Chapter 237 of the Code), which includes review of
permit applications and issuance of permits subsequent
to Conservation Commission decisions, recordkeeping,
public assistance and enforcement.
[1]
With respect to land management, it develops and updates
land management plans for conservation lands under
Conservation Commission jurisdiction within the Town for
approval by the Conservation Commission.
[2]
(a)
With respect to lake and pond management, the Conservation
Program manages and protects the Town's lakes and ponds
through the implementation and monitoring of programs to
address ecological impairments and restore water quality for
the purposes of promoting healthy pond ecosystems,
protecting human health, and supporting recreation and
enjoyment.
(b)
With respect to land acquisition, the Conservation Program
assists in the evaluation of parcels for Town acquisition or
disposition and implements Town policy dealing with
conservation restrictions.
(c)
The Conservation Program seeks to implement other
objectives of the Local Comprehensive Plan and Open Space
and Recreation Plan. The division implements a public
environmental education agenda, particularly for elementary
schools.
(d)
(2)
E.
§ 241-47.36 BARNSTABLE CODE § 241-47.36
232:704
Interrelationships.
Town Manager. The Conservation Program interacts for the
purpose of conservation facilities management, budgeting,
program approval, expenditures, and staff support for
Conservation Commission-related issues coming before the
Town Council.
(a)
Other departments. In addition to the interdisciplinary
approach and interrelationships which exist between the
programs in the Planning and Development Department,
extensive interaction with other municipal components:
interaction with Marine and Environmental Affairs in permit
review and enforcement matters; interaction with Marine and
Environmental Affairs and Public Works for the purpose of
implementation of land management plans for property under
the Conservation Commission's jurisdiction; Assessing,
Collector, and Treasurer with respect to tax title properties;
Legal with respect to Commission representation on
adjudicatory matters and land acquisition; Inspectional
Services and Public Works for the purpose of lakes and pond
management.
(b)
Multiple-member boards. Interaction with the Conservation
Commission for provision of administrative, clerical, and
technical support.
(c)
(3)
Parking Management.
Purpose. The purpose of the Parking Management Program is to
provide leadership and expertise on the development and
implementation of comprehensive parking management policy and
strategies in the context of a multi-modal system and integrated
with overall land use, economic development, and transportation
goals.
(1)
Authorities and responsibilities.
Parking resource management. Maximizes availability and
accessibility of parking and transportation opportunities
throughout the Town; efficiently manages parking resources
through planning, business outreach, staff support, technical
assistance, technology, and various compliance functions
pursuant to Town ordinances and MGL chapters concerning
parking.
(a)
Parking enforcement. Provides administrative, clerical and
technical support for collection and adjudication functions for
the processing of parking citations, all municipal parking
facilities, parking meters and technology, and enforcement of
parking code compliance within the Town.
(b)
(2)
F.
§ 241-47.36 WASTEWATER DISCHARGE § 241-47.36
232:705
§ 241-47.37. (Reserved)
§ 241-47.38. Police Department.
The Police Department provides police services to all people within the
Town with respect, fairness and compassion. The Department is under the
administrative and operational control of the Chief of Police.
Gateway greeters. Connects people to places through the
provision of visitor and resident services to support better
utilization of the existing parking supply in support of
Downtown Hyannis' activity, economy and vibrancy.
(c)
Interrelationships.
Town Manager. Access and Parking Management interacts
directly with the Town Manager's office primarily through the
Assistant Town Manager, who provides direction and
supervision.
(a)
Other departments. In addition to the interdisciplinary
approach and interrelationships which exist between the
programs in the Planning and Development Department,
interrelationships commonly exist with the Police, Public
Works, Inspectional Services, Marine and Environmental
Affairs, Community Services, Finance, Licensing, and Airport.
(b)
Multiple-member boards: interaction with the Disability
Commission.
(c)
Other interactions. Access and Parking Management interacts
with the Hyannis Main Street Business Improvement District,
the Greater Hyannis Area and Cape Cod Chambers of
Commerce, community agencies and private enterprises as
well as state agencies to seek effective accomplishment of
goals and objectives.
(d)
(3)
Purpose. The Police Department is committed to crime prevention;
protection of life and property; preservation of peace, order and safety;
the enforcement of laws and ordinances; and the safeguarding of
constitutional guaranties. The Department seeks to enhance the Town's
quality of life by investigating problems and incidents, seeking
solutions and fostering a sense of security within the community. The
Department also seeks to maximize survival of persons and
preservation of property in the Town in the event of a natural or manmade
disaster, nuclear or otherwise, by effective preplanning and by
making use of all manpower, equipment, available shelter protection
and other resources during an actual emergency. The Department is
dedicated to providing a quality work environment and the
development of its members through effective training and leadership.
A.
B. Authorities and responsibilities.
§ 241-47.36 BARNSTABLE CODE § 241-47.38
232:706
§ 241-47.39. (Reserved)
§ 241-47.40. Public Works Department.
The Public Works Department consists of six divisions, Administration and
Technical Support, Highway, Solid Waste, Structures and Grounds, Water
Pollution Control and Water Supply. The Department is under the
management control of the Director of Public Works.
The Police Department acts pursuant to the authorities vested
to Police Departments under MGL c. 41, §§ 97A and 98, as well
as c. 31, as it concerns civil service. The Department is a fullservice
Department, responsible for all law enforcement within the
jurisdiction of the Town of Barnstable. It maintains public relations
with the media and community; and operates within the structure
of an Administrative Services Bureau and a Field Services Bureau.
It establishes procedures for recruitment, selection and training of
all personnel to effectively maintain the public peace, safety and
order through a variety of functions and activities.
(1)
The Police Department functions as the Emergency Preparedness
Department, consistent with the Acts of 1950, Chapter 639, § 13,
as amended. The Department is responsible for coordinating and
preplanning all disaster emergency functions and services within
the Town amongst all municipal and non-municipal agencies and
departments on behalf of the Town Manager. The Department, in
fulfilling this role, provides assistance to the Town Manager in a
declared disaster emergency, and in further accordance with the
Town's Emergency Operations Plan. The Chief of Police serves as
the Director in this regard.
(2)
Interrelationships.
Town Manager. As the appointing authority and the Chief
Administrative Officer of the Town, the Police Department has
extensive interaction with the Town Manager.
(1)
Other departments. The Police Department interacts and
coordinates with all other municipal departments, the schools, and
the Barnstable Municipal Airport to ensure the highest level of
service to the community. Particular interaction exists with Public
Works, Information Technology, Legal, and Schools. The
Department also maintains relationships with other local, regional,
state, and federal law enforcement agencies.
(2)
C.
Purpose. The Public Works Department's purpose is to protect,
preserve and improve the Town's infrastructure and related assets in
a manner which meets and enhances the current and future social
and economic needs of the community and contributes to a healthy,
safe and quality environment for the Town's citizens and its visitors;
to provide water service to the Hyannis area and a cost-effective and
A.
§ 241-47.38 WASTEWATER DISCHARGE § 241-47.40
232:707
environmentally sound means of disposing of solid waste and
wastewater.
Authorities and responsibilities. The Public Works Department operates
pursuant to various state, federal and municipal laws including: MGL
c. 21, §§ 26 through 53, c. 246 and CMR 314 pertaining to sewage
treatment and disposal; 310 CMR, Section 19, governing solid waste
disposal; c. 85 and 90 governing highway and bridge traffic control,
financing and repair; c. 114 concerning management and financing of
cemeteries; c. 7, c. 149, § 44, c. 30B which regulate procurements; c.
131, § 40 and 310 CMR, Section 10, governing wetlands protection.
B.
Organizational components.
Administration and Technical Support Division: provides
centralized administrative and management support to the five
other divisions and other Town departments. These services
include policy and procedural guidance, program and capital
planning, oversight of Division operations, procurement,
personnel, asset management and budgetary management,
community relations, and continuous liaison with the Town
Manager. Also provides engineering, architectural, and surveying
services in support of capital improvement and other projects.
(1)
Highway Division: to protect, maintain and improve the Town's
roadway system, parking facilities and drainage facilities in a
manner which promotes maximum life, improves traffic flow and
enhances both pedestrian and vehicle safety; to provide fleet
management and maintenance to Town vehicles and equipment;
seasonally to operate the drawbridge in Osterville; and to manage
snow and ice operations.
(2)
Solid Waste Division: manages a residential solid and certain
hazardous waste collection programs, including maintenance and
monitoring of the capped sanitary landfill, a recycling and
hazardous waste collection center; promotion of a recycling
program; marketing of recyclable materials; manages a
construction and demolition material transfer station for residents;
and provides municipal packer collections services for municipal
facilities and locations.
(3)
Structures and Grounds Division: protect, enhance, and maintain
the Town's municipal buildings, parks, marinas, recreational and
community facilities and resources; manage construction,
renovation, and maintenance of facilities with a high priority on
energy-efficiency and conservation; operate, manage and maintain
Town cemeteries and interment program.
(4)
Water Pollution Control Division: manages the wastewater
collection and disposal system, including operation and
maintenance of a secondary wastewater treatment plant and
septage processing facility, wastewater pumping stations, and
(5)
C.
§ 241-47.40 BARNSTABLE CODE § 241-47.40
232:708
gravity and force sewage collection mains; operation of an
industrial pretreatment program and a laboratory for testing the
quality of septage and sewage; maintains an accounts receivable
and billing system for sewer use.
Water Supply Division: manages the drinking water supply, storage,
and distribution system, including operation of water treatment
facilities in the Hyannis area; maintains an accounts receivable and
billing system for water supply.
(6)
Interrelationships.
Town Manager. In respect to the vast majority of activities,
significant interaction is necessary.
(1)
Other departments. As the Public Works Department services most
departments, interaction is recurring, dependent upon the specific
activity to be undertaken.
(2)
Multiple-member boards. The Public Works Department provides
technical and administrative support to the Public Works
Commission, the Hyannis Water Board, the Water Pollution Control
Board, and the Roads Committee.
(3)
D.
§ 241-47.40 WASTEWATER DISCHARGE § 241-47.40
232:709

ARTICLE V
Administrative Policies and Procedures of Town Council
§ 241-48. Generally.97 [Added 10-20-2005 by Order No. 2006-028]
This article describes all Town Council administrative policies established
for the purpose of guiding the development and implementation of
administrative procedures by the Town Manager within the Town.98 The
administrative policies and, hence, the administrative procedures shall
describe all legislative, administrative, and adjudicatory procedures of the
Town. It shall establish policies and procedures by which municipal
legislation is developed, introduced, and approved before the Town Council
and by which rules and regulations are adopted by Town administrative
agencies. It specifies the manner in which all the entities of the Town
function administratively, through the promulgation of policies and
procedures. It delineates the method and manner in which adjudicatory
proceedings are to be conducted by the various Town agencies and officials
who have the responsibility of deciding individual cases.
§ 241-49. Communications.99 [Added 10-20-2005 by Order No.
2006-028]
§ 241-50. Ethics.
It is the policy of the Town of Barnstable that effective communication,
whether written, oral, or graphic, be exhibited on all occasions in order
to convey all relevant goals, policies, procedures, and facts related to
all issues.
A.
Effective management is based on effective communication. The nature
of communicating is ever changing as more people are involved and
depend on information; information is more complex, subtle, and
subliminal; and communication depends far more on high technology.
In light of these realities, the Town's communication practices shall be
based on the following goals: clarity, succinctness, and timeliness.
B.
It is the policy of the Town of Barnstable that all public officials and
employees demonstrate the highest standard of personal integrity,
truthfulness, honesty and fortitude in all of their public activities.
A.
The proper operation of democratic government requires that public
officials and employees be independent, impartial, and responsible to
the people they serve; that government decisions and policy be made
in the proper channels of the governmental structure; that public office
not be used for personal gain or to advance the interests of family,
B.
97.Editor’s Note: Former § 241-53, Generally, was repealed 9-8-2005 by Order No. 2005-126.
98.Editor's Note: See Ch. 401, Administrative Procedures.
99.Editor’s Note: Former § 241-54, Communications, was repealed 9-8-2005 by Order No.
2005-126.
§ 241-48 WASTEWATER DISCHARGE § 241-50
232:711
§ 241-51. Financial.
relatives or friends; and that the public have confidence in the integrity
of its government.
Public official and employee conduct and actions shall strive to achieve
the following goals:
(1) To maintain impartiality;
(2) To ensure that public office not be used for personal gain;
(3) To ensure that the public have confidence in its local government.
C.
It is the policy of the Town of Barnstable that financial management
be conducted with the objectives of providing municipal service in a
predictable manner and alignment with public policy goals as set forth
by the Town Council.
A.
The Town of Barnstable faces continuing operational and capital
requirements to meet the increasing needs of its citizens. These
requirements have to be met amidst little or no state or federal
assistance and within the constraints of Proposition 2 1/2. To help
ensure the Town's financial stewardship, an established program of
managing the Town's finances becomes essential. To this end, the Town
Council seeks policies and procedures that are financially prudent and
in the Town's best economic interest. The Town Council promulgates
these financial policies consistent with its responsibilities under Part VI,
Financial Procedures, Section 6-8, Financial Management Procedures,
of the Town Charter.
B.
In following this policy, the Town shall pursue the following goals:
To develop effective financial management within the Town which
conform to generally accepted accounting principles;
(1)
To simplify, clarify, and modernize the financial systems of the Town
as the need occurs;
(2)
To provide increased public confidence in public financial
management;
(3)
To provide increased economy and financial performance and to
maximize to the fullest extent practicable the use of public funds of
the Town; and
(4)
To provide safeguards to ensure quality and integrity of the
financial systems.
(5)
C.
In order to obtain the above goals, the Town Council adopts the
following policies:
(1) Accounting, auditing and financial planning.
D.
§ 241-50 BARNSTABLE CODE § 241-51
232:712
The Town will establish accounting practices which conform to
generally accepted accounting principles (GAAP) as set forth
by the authoritative standard-setting body for units of local
government.
(a)
An annual audit will be performed by an independent public
accounting firm and an official, comprehensive annual financial
report (CAFR) shall be issued no later than six months
following the end of the fiscal year.
(b)
A management letter, a by-product of an annual audit, shall be
provided by the independent public accounting firm no later
than February 1. Additional findings and recommendations
may be communicated in a separate letter to be provided no
later than March 1.
(c)
A ten-year financial forecast shall be prepared annually by the
Town Manager, in accordance with the Charter, Section 6-6,
projecting revenues and expenditures for all operating funds.
This forecast shall be used as a planning tool in developing the
following year's operating budget and capital improvements
plan. The forecast shall be submitted no later than October 1.
(d)
General topics.
A Self Insurance Reserve Fund will be established and
maintained to cover workers' compensation as authorized by
Chapter 40, § 13A, of the Massachusetts General Laws and
property losses as authorized by Chapter 40, § 13, of the
Massachusetts General Laws.
(a)
In order to cover losses arising out this fund, amount will be
appropriated to cover the stop-loss premium and a sum to
establish the fund for future losses.
(b)
It is the intention of this fund to cover all losses arising out of
employment injury, fire, vandalism, burglary, theft and repairs.
A stop-loss insurance through an insurance carrier will be
provided for catastrophic losses.
(c)
(2)
Debt refinancing. An advance refunding of outstanding debt shall
only be considered when present value savings of at least 3.00% of
the principal amount of the refunded bonds are produced, unless:
(a) a debt restructuring is necessary or (b) bond covenant revisions
are necessary in order to facilitate the ability to provide services
or to issue additional debt. An analysis shall be conducted when
necessary to determine whether debt financing, cash purchase, or
leasing is the most effective method of financing for the Town.
[Amended 1-6-2011 by Order No. 2011-036]
(3)
(4) General fund.
§ 241-51 WASTEWATER DISCHARGE § 241-51
232:713
Current revenues will be sufficient to support current
expenditures.
(a)
Debt will not be used to fund current operating expenditures.
General Fund Undesignated Fund balance of at least 4%
of total annual expenditures shall be budgeted. The
Undesignated Fund balance shall be used to provide for
temporary financing for unanticipated or unforeseen
extraordinary needs of an emergency nature, for example,
costs related to a natural disaster or calamity, or an
unexpected liability created by federal or state legislation,
new service needs that have been identified after the
budget process, new public safety or health needs,
revenue shortfalls, service enhancements, or opportunities
to achieve costs savings. [Amended 5-18-1995 by Order
No. 95-147]
[1]
Funds shall be allocated from the Undesignated Fund
balance only after an analysis has been prepared by the
Town Manager and presented to Town Council. The
analysis shall provide sufficient evidence to establish that
the remaining balance is adequate to offset potential
downturns in revenue sources and provide a sufficient
cash balance for daily financial needs. The analysis shall
address the nature of the proposed expenditure and the
revenue requirement in subsequent budget years.
[2]
Prior to allocating funds from the Undesignated Fund
balance the Town Council shall find that an emergency or
extraordinary need exists to justify the use of these funds.
Funds shall be allocated each year in the budget process
to replace any use of Undesignated Fund balance funds
during the preceding fiscal year to maintain the balance
of the Undesignated Fund balance at 4% of budgeted
expenditures. [Amended 5-18-1995 by Order No.
95-147]
[3]
(b)
The year-to-year increase of actual revenue from the levy of
the ad valorem (property) tax shall generally not exceed 2.5%
(Proposition 2 1/2):
[1] Excluding taxable value gained through consolidation;
[2] Excluding the value gained through new construction; and
Excluding expenditure increases funded outside the tax
limit cap; and
[3]
Not excluding the valuation gained or lost through
revaluation or equalization programs.
[4]
(c)
§ 241-51 BARNSTABLE CODE § 241-51
232:714
Property values shall be appraised at a minimum every three
years.
(d)
The Town shall encourage the Tax Collector to follow an
aggressive policy of collecting property tax revenues. An
average collection rate of at least 95% of current levy shall be
maintained.
(e)
Charges for service and other revenues shall be examined
annually and adjusted as deemed necessary to respond to
changes in cost of service.
(f)
An adequate level of maintenance and replacement will be
funded each year to insure that all capital facilities and
equipment are properly maintained as needed and tied to
proper repair and maintenance procedures.
(g)
General obligation debt.
All debt shall be financed outside the limitations of Proposition
2 1/2 with the exception of debt related to Enterprise Funds,
gifts, and betterments. The requirements for such financing
shall be an expenditure of at least $250,000 and a useful life
in excess of five years. [Amended 5-18-1995 by Order No.
95-147]
(a)
The term of long-term debt generally shall not exceed the
expected useful life of the capital asset being financed and, in
no case, shall it exceed 20 years.
(b)
The ratio of net debt (total outstanding Town of Barnstable
general obligation debt less reimbursements) to total assessed
valuation shall not exceed 1.5%. This excludes debt of
overlapping jurisdictions.
(c)
The ratio of debt service to total expenditures (operating
expenditures and debt service combined) shall not exceed
15%.
(d)
The Town shall target a Standard and Poor's (S and P) ratio of
8%. S and P ratio is calculated by dividing overall net debt per
capita by effective buying income per capita.
(e)
Current revenue should be committed annually to provide
sufficient "pay-as-you-go" financing so that, at the end of five
years, annual contributions from current revenues amount to
10% of new debt to be issued.
(f)
Excess appropriated bond issues shall be placed into a bond
repayment fund account at the end of a project completion.
The only purpose of the bond repayment fund account shall be:
(g)
(5)
§ 241-51 WASTEWATER DISCHARGE § 241-51
232:715
To make bulk principal paydowns against general bond
debt; or
[1]
To be used to pay down the principal on any bond issue at
the time of refinancing as provided for in Subsection D(3)
of this § 241-56.
[2]
Offset receipts and Enterprise Funds in general.
The Town shall establish and maintain offset receipts and
Enterprise Funds pursuant to MGL Chapter 40, § 39, and
Chapter 44, § 53, respectively, wherever possible in order to
ensure annual operation and maintenance needs are met and
such services are financed in an equitable manner.
(a)
The term of debt for offset receipts and Enterprise Funds
generally shall not exceed the useful life of the asset, and in no
case shall the term exceed 30 years.
(b)
(c) Principal repayment delays shall not exceed five years.
An offset receipts and Enterprise Fund shall maintain a fully
funded debt service reserve for its existing bond issues and
future issues.
(d)
(e) Debt service coverage of at least 1.25 times shall be the target.
Short-term debt, including tax-exempt commercial paper, shall
be used when authorized for interim financing of capital
projects. The term of short-term debt shall not exceed five
years. Total short-term debt shall generally not exceed 10% of
outstanding long-term debt.
(f)
Ongoing routine, preventive maintenance should be funded on
a pay-as-you-go basis.
(g)
Capital enterprise projects should be financed through a
combination of cash financing and debt. A ratio of at least 10%
equity contributions is desirable.
(h)
All offset receipts and Enterprise Funds shall maintain a
working capital reserve, defined as cash and investment pool
equity in current assets, which is equivalent to 30 days of
budgeted operations and maintenance expense.
(i)
Rates for offset receipts and Enterprise Funds shall be
designed to generate sufficient revenues to support the full
cost (direct and indirect) of operations and debt and provide
debt service coverage, if applicable, and to ensure adequate
and appropriate levels of working capital. Rates for the
Department of Community Services Enterprise Fund shall be
designed to generate revenue amounts less than required to
support the full cost (direct and indirect) of operations and
(j)
(6)
§ 241-51 BARNSTABLE CODE § 241-51
232:716
§ 241-52. Fleet services.
debt and working capital. [Amended 5-18-1995 by Order
No. 95-147]
Gifts and grants.
All grants shall be managed to comply with the laws,
regulations and guidance of the grantor; and all gifts and
donations shall be managed and expended according to the
wishes and instructions of the donor.
(a)
All gifts and grants shall be evaluated for suitability and
consistency to Town policies. They shall also be formally
accepted by both the Town Manager and the Town Council.
(b)
(7)
Capital Trust Fund. A Capital Trust Fund is hereby established
for the purpose of financing debt service for recommended capital
improvement program projects, as contained within the Town's
five-year capital improvement plan. [Added 5-18-1995 by Order
No. 95-147; amended 5-21-1998 by Order. No. 98-119]
The Capital Trust fund will be funded through a general
operations set-aside at a minimum of $1,900,000 annually.
(a)
The Capital Trust Fund shall not be utilized for any purpose
other than that stated herein.
(b)
The criteria for reviewing capital project eligibility for Capital
Trust Fund borrowing include the following:
The capital project shall have a financing term of 20 years
or less;
[1]
The capital project shall have a minimum project cost of
$250,000;
[2]
The capital project is approved by the Town Council for
funding through an appropriation and loan order
submitted by the Town Manager.
[3]
(c)
The Capital Trust Fund will have a debt service restriction on
the fund, such that debt service estimates from authorized loan
orders shall not exceed, at any one time, more than 80% of the
amount in the fund as of the close of the fiscal year prior to the
next debt service authorization, unless recommended by the
Town Manager
(d)
The Capital Trust Fund shall otherwise function in accordance
with related financial policies of the Town.
(e)
(8)
It is the policy of the Town of Barnstable to authorize the acquisition
and utilization of vehicles for use by officials of the Town, in the conduct
A.
§ 241-51 WASTEWATER DISCHARGE § 241-52
232:717
§ 241-53. Insurance.
It is the policy of the Town of Barnstable that, giving due regard to the
financial limitations of the Town, prudent managerial oversight should limit
risks and exposures. Local governments are subject to four basic types of
risks: real and personal property loss; loss of income or increased costs
associated with property loss; personnel loss; and liability. In response
to these potential losses, the Town of Barnstable shall always consider
and pursue the best action or combination of actions to control risk: risk
avoidance; risk prevention; risk assumption; and risk transfer. The purpose
of this policy is to provide a functional tool for insurance management. In
pursuing this policy, the Town shall abide by the following goals:
§ 241-54. Investment.
It is the policy of the Town of Barnstable that, giving due regard to the
safety and risk of investment, all available funds shall be invested in
conformance with legal and administrative guidelines and maximize yields
with the minimal risk and utilization of collateralization when requested.
Effective cash management is recognized as essential to good fiscal
management. An aggressive cash management and investment policy will
be pursued to take advantage of investment interest as a viable revenue
source. The Town's portfolio shall be designed and managed in a manner
responsive to the public trust and consistent with state and local law.
Investments shall be made with the primary objectives of:
of their employment responsibilities. Municipal employee are obligated
to comply with the provisions of this procedure when their employment
responsibilities require use of a municipal vehicle.
This policy is based on the following guidelines:
Legal compliance with all federal and state laws, rules, and
regulations;
(1)
(2) Appropriate financial security;
(3) Proper maintenance of all Town vehicles; and
(4) Superior ethical conduct by Town employees when using vehicles.
B.
A. The Town should not insure itself against minor recurrent losses;
Self insurance should be used where risks are recurrent and financially
manageable; and
B.
C. Insurance be sought for potential major losses.
A. Preservation of capital;
B. Maintenance of sufficient liquidity to meet operating needs;
C. Security of Town funds and investments;
§ 241-52 BARNSTABLE CODE § 241-54
232:718
§ 241-55. Computers and automation.
§ 241-56. Personnel.
Diversification of investments to avoid unreasonable or avoidable risks;
and
D.
E. Maximization of return on the portfolio.
The purpose of this policy is to establish guidelines for the selection and
utilization of computers in the Town of Barnstable. This policy is also
intended to set up support procedures and personnel for assisting users
in acquiring and utilizing computers.
A.
Computers are currently being acquired and used in most Town
departments. This occurrence is streamlining work and changing the
way many employees view information and its effect on their jobs.
The decreasing costs and increasing power have put computers in the
reach of all departments. The Town recognizes the need to define the
appropriate role for the computer.
B.
While acknowledging the power of the computer to increase
productivity, there is a need to set standards for ensuring compatibility.
There is also a need to review uses for appropriate minicomputer
applications and ensure that information systems needs could not be
handled better in some other manner. These computer policies are
specifically intended to attain the following objectives:
Encourage the use of technology of all types to improve and
enhance the efficiency of the Town's procedures and practices
whenever and wherever possible.
(1)
Maintain and promulgate standards for computer technology and
general electronic information management. Provide policy
guidance to the management on the review and purchase of
computer technology (hardware, software, and communications) so
as to insure compliance with published standards.
(2)
Maintain procedures and policies to insure that the Town's
electronic resources are properly managed. Emphasis shall be
placed on insuring that electronic information is easily accessible
by those departments requiring access.
(3)
No deviation from published hardware, software, communications,
or information management policies/standards without a written
waiver signed by the Town Manager and/or his/her designee.
(4)
Centralize functions which can be automated and/or centralize so
as to maximize the utilization of the Town's personnel and/or other
financial resources.
(5)
C.
§ 241-54 WASTEWATER DISCHARGE § 241-56
232:719
§ 241-57. Procurement.
It is the policy of the Town of Barnstable to procure goods and services
that help the organization deliver quality, competitively priced services in a
manner as environmentally benign as practicable to the citizens and visitors
of Barnstable. The Town's procurement policies are intended to minimize
risks and realize efficiencies by way of superior management consistent
with the Commonwealth of Massachusetts Chapter 30B of the General
Laws: Uniform Procurement Act; Chapter 30, § 39M; and Chapter 149,
§§ 44A through M. The Town of Barnstable's management of procurement
will be conducted with the primary objectives of purchasing competitively
priced, quality goods and/or services in quantities necessary to accomplish
It is the policy of the Town of Barnstable to establish and maintain
an equitable personnel system. This system should also promote the
efficiency and economy of government, to promote the morale and
well-being of Town employees, and to promote equal employment
opportunity for all employees and candidates for employment.
A.
The dynamics of personnel management must mediate between
organizational change and the need for technical stability through
affirmative action, human resource planning and cutback management,
productivity, and labor relations. Effective personnel management must
also balance the four values of social equity, responsiveness, efficiency,
and individual rights. The personnel policies are based on the following
principles in order to balance these values:
Recruiting, selecting, and developing employees on the basis of
their abilities, knowledge, and skills.
(1)
(2) Providing equitable compensation.
Training employees as needed to assure high quality performance
in delivering quality services to the public.
(3)
Retaining employees on the basis of the adequacy of their
performance, correcting inadequate performance, and separating
employees whose performance does not adequately improve.
(4)
Assuring fair treatment of applicants and employees in all aspects
of personnel administration without regard to political affiliation,
race, color, national origin, age, sex, creed, handicap, or any other
nonmerit factor, except where such factor is a bona fide
occupational requirement, and with proper regard for their privacy
and constitutional rights as citizens; prohibiting discrimination
against any person on the basis of such nonmerit factors.
(5)
Assuring that employees are protected against coercion for
partisan political purposes and are prohibited from using their
official authority for any purpose other than those duties and
responsibilities directly associated with their positions in Town
government.
(6)
B.
§ 241-56 BARNSTABLE CODE § 241-57
232:720
service delivery objectives. The Town of Barnstable recognizes that the
use of taxpayer funds deserves the greatest care in procuring goods and
services which are as environmentally benign as practicable and which
enable the Town to attain its objectives in a cost-effective manner.
§ 241-58. Property management.
It is the policy of the Town of Barnstable to manage its public land
and waters, buildings and structures in order to protect the public's
investment.
A.
Effective property management is based on the following basic
principles:
(1) Protect against liability.
(2) Preserve and enhance financial and natural assets.
(3) Provide for appropriate access.
(4) Maintain visual and cultural character.
Use of public lands and facilities shall be consistent with applicable
open space, recreation, historic, building, and land management
plans.
(5)
B.
These principles are best served by the pursuit of the following goals:
Protect against liability:
Ensure that insurance policies provide for asset replacement
where practical.
(a)
(b) Provide appropriate security for all properties.
Provide for appropriate maintenance and improvement of
buildings, structures and lands.
(c)
(d) Seek the removal of attractive nuisances.
(e) Educate users as to safe and appropriate activities.
(1)
Preserve and enhance financial and natural assets.
(a) Implement long-range capital improvement plan
(b) Develop management plans for all lands and facilities.
(c) Establish guidelines for asset acquisition and disposition.
Provide for appropriate maintenance and improvement of
buildings, structures and lands [Subsection C(1)(c)].
(d)
(e) Enforce rules and regulations regarding public use and access.
(2)
(3) Provide for appropriate access.
C.
§ 241-57 WASTEWATER DISCHARGE § 241-58
232:721
Enforce rules and regulations regarding public use and access
[Subsection C(2)(e)].
(a)
Educate users as to safe and appropriate activities [Subsection
C(1)(e)].
(b)
Provide for appropriate maintenance and improvement of
buildings, structures and lands [Subsection C(1)(c)].
(c)
(d) Implement American for Disabilities Act Plans for access.
Develop management plans for all lands and facilities
[Subsection C(2)(b)].
(e)
Maintain visual and cultural character.
Provide for appropriate maintenance and improvement of
buildings, structures and lands [Subsection C(1)(c)].
(a)
(b) Enhance and preserve the physical appearances and vistas.
Ensure conformity to existing zoning, historic district
guidelines, and local comprehensive plan architectural design
guidelines.
(c)
(4)
Use of public lands and facilities shall be consistent with applicable
management plans for open space, recreation, historic, building,
and land.
Develop management plans for all lands and facilities, and
update every 10 years, or more often as is required, except as
noted below.
(a)
Ensure conformity to existing zoning, historic district
guidelines, and local comprehensive plan architectural design
guidelines [Subsection C(4)(c)].
(b)
Provide appropriate security for all properties [Subsection
C(1)(b)].
(c)
Provide for appropriate maintenance and improvement of
buildings, structures and lands [Subsection C(1)(c)].
(d)
Ensure that all maintenance and improvements to existing
buildings and structures or the development of new ones are
energy efficient.
(e)
(f) Seek the removal of attractive nuisances [Subsection C(1)(d)].
Educate users as to safe and appropriate activities [Subsection
C(1)(e)].
(g)
Develop and implement the Town's Open Space and Recreation
Plan, and update every five years, or more often as is required.
(h)
(5)
§ 241-58 BARNSTABLE CODE § 241-58
232:722
§ 241-59. Trust fund management.
§ 241-60. Volunteer.
The Town of Barnstable recognizes that volunteers are an integral part of
the Town's government. Their participation in the process of government
contributes to the uniqueness of the Town's quality of life. Volunteers
choose to act in recognition of social responsibility and without concern
for monetary gain, going beyond what is necessary to one's physical wellbeing.
A citizen may choose to be a policy-making volunteer or a service
volunteer. The Town of Barnstable is committed to providing adequate
support, training, leadership, and recognition for all its volunteers. It
expects commitment and excellence from the volunteers. The Town has the
right to determine duties, authorities and appropriateness of volunteers.
Follow appropriate federal and state grant guidelines to ensure
eligibility for funding property management objectives.
(i)
Establish effective coordination with the state and federal
government, other municipalities, Barnstable County, Fire
Districts, not-for-profit organizations, and others where
necessary.
(j)
In order to effectuate this policy, the Town should ensure consistency in
the application of all other administrative policies which have a direct
interrelationship to the property management policy of the Town.
D.
It is the policy of the Town of Barnstable that trust fund management be
consistent with the legal requirements, including Town ordinances, and
spirit of each respective trust document and, to the maximum extent
possible, realize the purposes the trusts were intended to achieve.
A.
Trust fund management will be conducted with the primary objectives
of:
Conformance to each trust document's specified purpose, legal
requirements, and administrative guidelines;
(1)
Adherence to the Town of Barnstable general ordinance providing
for the administration of Town trusts;100
(2)
(3) Preservation of capital;
(4) Maintenance of security of trust funds and investments;
(5) Maximization of total return for each trust fund;
(6) Efficient disbursement of funds on an equitable basis; and
(7) Effective collection of all due monies.
B.
100. Editor's Note: See Ch. 86, Funds.
§ 241-58 WASTEWATER DISCHARGE § 241-60
232:723
Following established volunteer management protocol, the Town has the
right to both select and remove volunteers.
§ 241-60 BARNSTABLE CODE § 241-60
232:724
ARTICLE VI
Town Manager Implementation and Reporting Responsibilities
§ 241-61. Authority to promulgate regulations.
The Town Council expressly authorizes the Town Manager to develop and
promulgate regulations and procedures for the efficient and effective
implementation of the Town Council administrative policies. No such
regulation or procedure shall be inconsistent with the provisions of these
policies, the ordinances of the Town, the Charter, state or federal law.
§ 241-62. Publication of procedures.
The publication of these regulations and procedures shall be a part of the
Administrative Code of the Town, but shall not be considered an ordinance
of the Town, in order to require the Town Manager the necessary ability to
maintain a current system of administration.101
§ 241-63. Annual report on attainment of policy goals. [Added
10-7-1993 by Order No. 93-028]
The Town Manager shall report on an annual basis the Town's progress in
attaining these policy goals and where the Town deviates from the stated
policies with a stated rationale for any deviation(s).
101. Editor's Note: The Town Manager's administrative procedures are in Chapter 401 of the
Code of the Town of Barnstable.
§ 241-61 WASTEWATER DISCHARGE § 241-63
232:725
Chapter 242
PERSONNEL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Personnel administration — Charter, Sec. 5-2.
Administrative Code — See Ch. 241.
Administrative procedures — See Ch. 401.
§ 242-1. Applicability; purpose.
§ 242-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the words and phrases listed below shall have the
following meanings, unless a different construction is clearly required by
the context or by the laws of the commonwealth:
CLASS — A position or group of positions sufficiently similar with respect
to the duties and responsibilities, so that the same descriptive title may
be used to designate each position allocated to the class, that the same
qualification shall be required of the incumbents, that the same tests of
fitness may be used to choose qualified employees and that the same scale
of compensation can apply with equity.
CLASSIFICATION PLAN — A schematic list of classes supported by
classification criteria and class specifications of job descriptions.
COMPENSATION PLAN — A salary or wage schedule keyed to classification
grade levels, the rules for administration of salaries, provisions on travel
and provisions on all forms of fringe benefits.
All Town departments and all positions in the Town service, excepting
elected officials and excepting employees appointed by the School
Committee, shall be subject to the provisions of this chapter, in
pursuance of the provisions of §§ 108A and 108C of Chapter 41 of the
General Laws. To the extent that any provision of an approved collective
bargaining agreement conflicts with any provisions of this chapter,
with respect to employees covered under such labor agreement, the
provisions of the approved collective bargaining agreement shall
prevail.
A.
The general purpose of this chapter is to establish a system of public
personnel management based on merit that meets the social, economic
and program needs of Town government. It is the intent of this chapter
to provide means to recruit, select and develop and maintain a
responsive work force. All personnel actions in the Town service shall
be made without regard to sex, race, religion, color, age, handicap,
political affiliation or other non-job-related factors, and shall be based
on merit and fitness.
B.
§ 241-63 BARNSTABLE CODE § 242-2
232:726
DEPARTMENT — Any department, board, committee, commission or other
agency of the Town subject to this chapter.
EMPLOYEE — A person appointed to a positions in the Town service.
PERSONNEL CODE — A written document describing the personnel
policies and regulations adopted by the Town Manager.
POSITION — A group of current duties and responsibilities assigned or
delegated by appropriate authority to one person.
TOWN — The Town of Barnstable.
§ 242-3. Human Resources Director.
§ 242-4. Personnel Code.
There shall be a Personnel Department headed by a Human Resources
Director. The Human Resources Director shall be experienced in
personnel management and public administration and shall be in
sympathy with merit principles. The Director shall be appointed by the
Town Manager to serve at the pleasure of the Manager in the same
manner as other appointive department heads.
A.
The Human Resources Director shall direct the administrative and
technical activities of the Department and shall:
Encourage and exercise leadership in the development of effective
personnel management within the several departments in Town
government, and make the services and facilities of the
Department available to all Town departments.
(1)
Advise the Town Manager in human resource planning and
utilization.
(2)
Administer the personnel management system of Town government
under the Town Manager.
(3)
(4) Establish and maintain records of all employees in Town service.
Apply and carry out the provisions of this chapter, the Personnel
Code and perform any lawful acts which may be necessary or
desirable to carry out the purposes and provisions of applicable
laws and regulations.
(5)
Provide advice and services to both the Personnel Board and Town
Manager in all matters pertaining to personnel management, to the
extent of available resources.
(6)
Render an annual report of the Department's activities and
operations to both the Personnel Board and Town Manager on or
before January 1 of each calendar year.
(7)
B.
§ 242-2 WASTEWATER DISCHARGE § 242-4
232:727
§ 242-5. Continuing review.
The Town Manager, in consultation with the Human Resources Director,
is empowered and authorized by this chapter to establish a Personnel
Code, consisting of personnel policies and regulations for the
maintenance of a public personnel management system, based on merit
and consistent with these principles:
Recruiting, selecting and advancing employees on the basis of their
relative ability, knowledge and skills, including open consideration
of qualified applicants for initial appointment;
(1)
(2) Providing equitable and adequate compensation;
Training employees, as needed, to assure high quality
performance;
(3)
Retraining employees on the basis of the adequacy of their
performance, correcting inadequate performance, and separating
employees whose inadequate performance cannot be corrected;
(4)
Assuring fair treatment of applicants and employees in all aspects
of personnel management without regard to political affiliation,
race, color, national origin, age, sex, handicap or religious creed
and with proper regard for their privacy and constitutional rights
as citizens; and
(5)
Assuring that employees are protected against coercion for
partisan political purposes and are prohibited from using their
official authority for the purpose of interfering with or affecting the
result of an election or a nomination for office.
(6)
A.
The Personnel Code may be amended by the Town Manager from time
to time. Such amendments shall be referred to the Personnel Board
for its review and comment, if any, prior to its adoption. Relative to its
approval of the code or any amendments thereto, pertaining specifically
to any proposal or proposals entailing any increase in Town funding,
such approval may be given by the Town Manager, contingent upon
favorable action by the Town Council, which action shall be limited to
the matter of funding. The substance of any proposed change may be
discussed by the Town Council, provided that the vote is on the basis
of funding, and not on the substance of the Personnel Code, or any
change(s) thereto.
B.
The Town Manager from time to time, with the assistance of the Human
Resources Director, shall initiate reviews and evaluations of the
operation of the personnel system for conformance with the provisions
of this chapter. Such reviews shall be scheduled as often as the Town
Manager finds necessary to improve and maintain the personnel system
consistent with the provisions of this chapter. The Town Manager shall
see to it that classification reviews are conducted as often as he finds
necessary to reflect changes in the classification as established or to
A.
§ 242-4 BARNSTABLE CODE § 242-5
232:728
§ 242-6. Repeal and validity.
Part III: Board of Health Regulations
Chapter 307
BODY ART ESTABLISHMENTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fee schedule — See Ch. 318. Massage establishments — See Ch. 346.
§ 307-1. Purpose.
Body art is becoming prevalent and popular throughout the commonwealth;
and the knowledge and practice of universal precautions, sanitation,
personal hygiene, sterilization, and aftercare requirements on the part of
the practitioner should be demonstrated to prevent the transmission of
disease or injury to the client and/or practitioner; now, therefore the Board
of Health of the Town of Barnstable adopted these regulations for the
practice of body art in the Town of Barnstable as part of the mission to
protect the health, safety, and welfare of the public. These regulations are
promulgated under the authority granted to the Board of Health under
Massachusetts General Law Chapter 111, § 31.
establish new classifications as warranted. The Town Manager shall
likewise direct studies of compensation and fringe benefits in effect
for comparable positions outside of the service of the Town at least
annually.
The Town Manager, following consultation with the Human Resources
Director, shall make recommendations to the Town Council for
adjusting compensation and fringe benefits in conformance with such
studies.
B.
The Personnel Ordinance currently in effect and any parts of other
ordinances which conflict with the provisions of this chapter are hereby
repealed. The provisions of the Personnel Code in effect immediately
prior to the effective date of this chapter shall remain in effect subject
to modification, amendment or repeal as provided in § 242-4A.102
A.
If any part of this chapter is for any reason held to be unconstitutional
or otherwise invalid, such invalidity shall not affect the validity of the
remaining parts.
B.
102. Editor's Note: Refers to former § 242-4A, which was repealed.
§ 242-5 BODY ART ESTABLISHMENTS § 307-2
307:729
§ 307-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AFTERCARE — Written instructions given to the client, specific to the body
art procedure(s) rendered, about caring for the body art and surrounding
area, including information about when to seek medical treatment, if
necessary.
APPLICANT — Any person who applies to the Board of Health for either a
body art establishment permit or practitioner permit.
AUTOCLAVE — An apparatus for sterilization utilizing steam pressure at a
specific temperature over a period of time.
AUTOCLAVING — A process which results in the destruction of all forms
of microbial life, including highly resistant spores, by the use of a steam
autoclave for a minimum of 30 minutes at 20 pounds of pressure (psi) at a
temperature of 270° F.
BLOODBORNE PATHOGENS STANDARD — OSHA Guidelines contained
in 29 CFR 1910.1030, entitled "Occupational Exposure to Bloodborne
Pathogens."
BOARD OF HEALTH or BOARD — The Board of Health that has jurisdiction
in the community in which a body art establishment is located.
BODY ART — The practice of physical body adornment by permitted
establishments and practitioners using, but not limited to, the following
techniques: body piercing, tattooing, cosmetic tattooing, branding, and
scarification. This definition does not include practices that are considered
medical procedures by the Board of Registration in Medicine, such as
implants under the skin, which are prohibited.
BODY ART ESTABLISHMENT or ESTABLISHMENT — A location, place, or
business that has been granted a permit by the Board, whether public or
private, where the practices of body art are performed, whether or not for
profit.
BODY ART PRACTITIONER or PRACTITIONER — A specifically identified
individual who has been granted a permit by the Board to perform body art
in an establishment that has been granted a permit by the Board.
BODY PIERCING — Puncturing or penetrating the skin of a client with
presterilized single-use needles and the insertion of presterilized jewelry or
other adornment into the opening. This definition excludes piercing of the
earlobe with a presterilized single-use stud-and-clasp system manufactured
exclusively for ear piercing.
BRANDING — Inducing a pattern of scar tissue by use of a heated material
(usually metal) to the skin, making a serious burn, which eventually
becomes a scar.
CLIENT — A member of the public who requests a body art procedure at a
body art establishment.
§ 307-2 BARNSTABLE CODE § 307-2
307:730
CONTAMINATED WASTE — Waste as defined in 105 CMR 480.000: Storage
and Disposal of Infectious or Physically Dangerous Medical or Biological
Waste, State Sanitary Code, Chapter VIII.
DEPARTMENT — The Department of Public Health or its authorized
representatives.
DISINFECTANT — A product registered as a disinfectant by the U.S.
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA).
DISINFECTION — The destruction of disease-causing microorganisms on
inanimate objects or surfaces, thereby rendering these objects safe for use
or handling.
EAR PIERCING — The puncturing of the lobe of the ear with a presterilized
single-use stud-and-clasp ear-piercing system following the manufacturer's
instructions.
EQUIPMENT — All machinery, including fixtures, containers, vessels, tools,
devices, implements, furniture, display and storage areas, sinks, and all
other apparatus and appurtenances, used in connection with the operation
of a body art establishment.
HAND SINK — A lavatory equipped with hot and cold running water under
pressure, used solely for washing hands, arms, or other portions of the body.
HOT WATER — Water that attains and maintains a temperature 110º to
130ºF.
INSTRUMENTS USED FOR BODY ART — Hand pieces, needles, needle
bars, and other instruments that may come in contact with a client's body
or may be exposed to bodily fluids during any body art procedure.
INVASIVE — Entry into the client's body either by incision or insertion of
any instruments into or through the skin or mucosa, or by any other means
intended to puncture, break, or otherwise compromise the skin or mucosa.
JEWELRY — Any ornament inserted into a newly pierced area, which must
be made of surgical implant-grade stainless steel; solid 14k or 18k white
or yellow gold, niobium, titanium, or platinum; or a dense, low-porosity
plastic, which is free of nicks, scratches, or irregular surfaces and has been
properly sterilized prior to use.
MINOR — Any person under the age of 18 years.
MOBILE BODY ART ESTABLISHMENT — Any trailer, truck, car, van,
camper or other motorized or nonmotorized vehicle, a shed, tent, movable
structure, bar, home or other similar facility.
OPERATOR — Any person who individually, or jointly or severally with
others, owns, or controls an establishment, but is not a body art
practitioner.
PERMIT — Board approval in writing to either (1) operate a body art
establishment or (2) operate as a body art practitioner within a body art
establishment. Board approval shall be granted solely for the practice of
body art pursuant to these regulations. Said permit is exclusive of the
§ 307-2 BODY ART ESTABLISHMENTS § 307-2
307:731
establishment's compliance with other licensing or permitting requirements
that may exist within community or political subdivision comprising the
Board's jurisdiction.
PERSON — An individual, any form of business or social organization
or any other nongovernmental legal entity, including but not limited to
corporations, partnerships, limited-liability companies, associations, trusts
or unincorporated organizations.
PHYSICIAN — An individual licensed as a qualified physician by the Board
of Registration in Medicine pursuant to MGL C. 112, § 2.
PROCEDURE SURFACE — Any surface of an inanimate object that contacts
the client's unclothed body during a body art procedure, skin preparation of
the area adjacent to and including the body art procedure, or any associated
work area which may require sanitizing.
SANITARY — Clean and free of agents of infection or disease.
SANITIZE — The application of a U.S. EPA registered sanitizer on a cleaned
surface in accordance with the label instructions.
SCARIFICATION — Altering skin texture by cutting the skin and controlling
the body's healing process in order to produce wounds, which result in
permanently raised wheals or bumps known as keloids.
SHARPS — Any object, sterile or contaminated, that may intentionally or
accidentally cut or penetrate the skin or mucosa, including, but not limited
to, needle devices, lancets, scalpel blades, razor blades, and broken glass.
SHARPS CONTAINER — A puncture-resistant, leakproof container that can
be closed for handling, storage, transportation, and disposal and that is
labeled with the international biohazard symbol.
SINGLE USE ITEMS — Products or items that are intended for one-time,
one-person use and are disposed of after use on each client, including, but
not limited to, cotton swabs or balls, tissues or paper products, paper or
plastic cups, gauze and sanitary coverings, razors, piercing needles, scalpel
blades, stencils, ink cups, and protective gloves.
STERILIZE — The use of a physical or chemical procedure to destroy all
microbial life including highly resistant bacterial endospores.
TATTOO — The indelible mark, figure or decorative design introduced by
insertion of dyes or pigments into or under the subcutaneous portion of the
skin.
TATTOOING — Any method of placing ink or other pigment into or under
the skin or mucosa by the aid of needles or any other instrument used to
puncture the skin, resulting in permanent coloration of the skin or mucosa.
This term includes all forms of cosmetic tattooing.
ULTRASONIC CLEANING UNIT — A unit approved by the Board, physically
large enough to fully submerge instruments in liquid, which removes all
foreign matter from the instruments by means of high frequency oscillations
transmitted through the contained liquid.
§ 307-2 BARNSTABLE CODE § 307-2
307:732
UNIVERSAL PRECAUTIONS — A set of guidelines and controls, published
by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), as "Guidelines
for Prevention of Transmission of Human Immunodeficiency Virus (HIV)
and Hepatitis B Virus (HBV) to Health-Care and Public-Safety Workers"
in Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report (MMWR), June 23, 1989, Vol.
38, No. S-6, and as "Recommendations for Preventing Transmission of
Human Immunodeficiency Virus and Hepatitis B Virus to Patients During
Exposure-Prone Invasive Procedures" in MMWR, July 12, 1991, Vol. 40,
No. RR-8. This method of infection control requires the employer and the
employee to assume that all human blood and specified human body fluids
are infectious for HIV, HBV, and other blood pathogens. Precautions include
hand washing; gloving; personal protective equipment; injury prevention;
and proper handling and disposal of needles, other sharp instruments, and
blood- and body-fluid-contaminated products.
§ 307-3. Exemptions.
§ 307-4. Prohibited practices.
Physicians licensed in accordance with MGL C. 112, § 2, and any person
registered as a qualified nurse under MGL C. 112, § 74, who perform
body art procedures as part of patient treatment are exempt from these
regulations.
A.
Individuals who pierce only the lobe of the ear with a presterilized
single-use stud-and-clasp ear-piercing system are exempt from these
regulations.
B.
No person shall establish or operate a mobile body art establishment or
temporary body art establishment.
A.
No tattooing, piercing of genitalia, branding or scarification shall be
performed on a person under the age of 18.
B.
Body piercing, other than piercing the genitalia, may be performed
on a person under the age of 18, provided that the youth provides
photographic identification and is accompanied by a properly identified
parent who also provides photographic identification (or legal guardian
with photographic identification) who has signed a form consenting to
such procedure.
C.
The following body piercings are hereby prohibited: piercing of the
uvula; piercing of the tracheal area; piercing of the neck; piercing of
the ankle; piercing between the ribs or vertebrae; piercing of the web
area of the hand or foot; piercing of the lingual frenulum (tongue web);
piercing of the clitoris; any form of chest or deep muscle piercings,
excluding the nipple; piercing of the anus; piercing of an eyelid,
whether top or bottom; piercing of the gums; piercing or skewering
of a testicle; so called "deep" piercing of the penis, meaning piercing
through the shaft of the penis, or "trans-penis" piercing in any area
from the corona glandis to the pubic bone; so called "deep" piercing of
D.
§ 307-2 BODY ART ESTABLISHMENTS § 307-4
307:733
§ 307-5. Operation of body art establishments.
Unless otherwise ordered or approved by the Board, each body art
establishment shall be constructed, operated and maintained to meet the
following minimum requirements:
the scrotum — meaning piercing through the scrotum, or "transcrotal"
piercing; so called "deep" piercing of the vagina.
The following practices are hereby prohibited unless performed by
a medical doctor licensed by the Commonwealth of Massachusetts:
tongue splitting; branding; three dimensional/beading/implementation,
tooth filing/fracturing/removal/tattooing; cartilage modification; genital
modification; introduction of saline or other liquids. [Amended
2-28-2006]
E.
Physical plant.
Walls, floors, ceilings, and procedure surfaces shall be smooth,
nonporous, free of open holes or cracks, light-colored, washable,
and in good repair. Walls, floors, and ceilings shall be maintained
in a clean condition. All procedure surfaces, including client chairs/
benches, shall be of such construction as to be easily cleaned and
sanitized after each client.
(1)
Solid partitions or walls extending from floor to ceiling shall
separate the establishment's space from any other room used for
human habitation, any food establishment or room where food is
prepared, any hair salon, any retail sales, or any other such activity
that may cause potential contamination of work surfaces.
(2)
The establishment shall take all measures necessary to ensure
against the presence or breeding of insects, vermin, and rodents
within the establishment.
(3)
Each body art station shall have a minimum of 45 square feet of
floor space for each practitioner. Each establishment shall have an
area that may be screened from public view for clients requesting
privacy. Multiple body art stations shall be separated by a divider
or partition at a minimum.
(4)
The establishment shall be well ventilated and provided with an
artificial light source equivalent to at least 20 footcandles three
feet off the floor, except that at least 100 footcandles shall be
provided at the level where the body art procedure is being
performed, and where instruments and sharps are assembled.
(5)
Light bulbs shall be shielded, coated, or otherwise shatter-resistant
in each body art station.
(6)
A separate, readily accessible hand sink with hot and cold running
water under pressure, preferably equipped with wrist- or foot-
(7)
A.
§ 307-4 BARNSTABLE CODE § 307-5
307:734
operated controls and supplied with liquid soap, and disposable
paper towels stored in fixed dispensers shall be readily accessible
within the establishment. Each operator area shall have a hand
sink.
There shall be a minimum of one toilet room containing a toilet
and sink with running water. The toilet room shall be provided with
toilet paper, liquid hand soap and paper towels stored in a fixed
dispenser.
(8)
At least one covered, foot-operated waste receptacle shall be
provided in each operator area and each toilet room. Receptacles
in the operator area shall be emptied daily. Solid waste shall be
stored in covered, leakproof, rodent-resistant containers and shall
be removed from the premises at least weekly.
(9)
At least one janitorial sink shall be provided in each body art
establishment for use in cleaning the establishment and proper
disposal of noncontaminated liquid wastes in accordance with all
applicable federal, state and local laws. Said sink shall be of
adequate size equipped with hot and cold running water under
pressure and permit the cleaning of the establishment and any
equipment used for cleaning.
(10)
All instruments and supplies shall be stored in clean, dry, and
covered containers. Containers shall be kept in a secure area
specifically dedicated to the storage of all instruments and
supplies.
(11)
The establishment shall have a cleaning area. Every cleaning area
shall have an area for the placement of an autoclave or other
sterilization unit located or positioned a minimum of 36 inches from
the required ultrasonic cleaning unit.
(12)
The establishment shall have a customer waiting area, exclusive
and separate from any workstation, instrument storage area,
cleaning area or any other area in the body art establishment used
for body art activity.
(13)
No animals of any kind shall be allowed in a body art establishment
except service animals used by persons with disabilities (e.g.,
Seeing Eye dogs). Fish aquariums shall be allowed in waiting
rooms and nonprocedural areas.
(14)
Smoking, eating, or drinking is prohibited in the area where body
art is performed, with the exception of fluids being offered to a
client during or after a body art procedure.
(15)
Requirements for single use items including inks, dyes and pigments.
Single-use items shall not be used on more than one client for
any reason. After use, all single-use sharps shall be immediately
(1)
B.
§ 307-5 BODY ART ESTABLISHMENTS § 307-5
307:735
disposed of in approved sharps containers pursuant to 105 CMR
480.000.
All products applied to the skin, such as but not limited to body
art stencils, applicators, gauze and razors, shall be single-use and
disposable.
(2)
(3) Hollow bore needles or needles with a cannula shall not be reused.
All inks, dyes, pigments, solid core needles, and equipment shall be
specifically manufactured for performing body art procedures and
shall be used according to manufacturer's instructions.
(4)
Inks, dyes or pigments may be mixed and may only be diluted
with water from an approved potable source. Immediately before
a tattoo is applied, the quantity of the dye to be used shall be
transferred from the dye bottle and placed into single-use paper
cups or plastic caps. Upon completion of the tattoo, these singleuse
cups or cups and their contents shall be discarded.
(5)
Sanitation and sterilization measures and procedures.
Only sterilized disposable single-use-type needles shall be used for
body art.
(1)
All other nondisposable instruments used for body art shall be
cleaned thoroughly after each use by scrubbing with an
appropriate soap or disinfectant solution and hot water (to remove
blood and tissue residue) and shall be placed in an ultrasonic unit
operated in accordance with manufacturer's instructions.
(2)
After being cleaned, nondisposable instruments used for body art
shall be packed individually in sterilizer packs and subsequently
sterilized in a steam autoclave. All sterilizer packs shall contain
either a sterilizer indicator or internal temperature indicator.
Sterilizer packs must be dated with an expiration date not to
exceed six months.
(3)
The autoclave shall be used, cleaned, and maintained according
to manufacturer's instruction. A copy of the manufacturer's
recommended procedures for the operation of the autoclave must
be available for inspection by the Board. Autoclaves shall be
located away from workstations or areas frequented by the public.
(4)
Each holder of a permit to operate a body art establishment shall
demonstrate that the autoclave used is capable of attaining
sterilization by monthly spore destruction tests. These tests shall
be verified through an independent laboratory. The permit shall not
be issued or renewed until documentation of the autoclave's ability
to destroy spores is received by the Board. These test records shall
be retained by the operator for a period of three years and made
available to the Board upon request.
(5)
C.
§ 307-5 BARNSTABLE CODE § 307-5
307:736
All instruments used for body art procedures shall remain stored
in sterile packages until just prior to the performance of a body
art procedure. After sterilization, the instruments used in body
art procedures shall be stored in a dry, clean, locked cabinet or
other tightly covered container reserved for the storage of such
instruments.
(6)
Sterile instruments may not be used if the package has been
breached or after the expiration date without first repackaging and
resterilizing.
(7)
When assembling instruments used for body art procedures, the
operator shall wear disposable medical gloves and use medically
recognized techniques to ensure that the instruments and gloves
are not contaminated.
(8)
Reusable cloth items shall be mechanically washed with detergent
and dried after each use. The cloth items shall be stored in a dry,
clean environment until used.
(9)
Posting requirements. The following shall be prominently displayed:
A disclosure statement, which shall be available from the Public
Health Division Office. A disclosure statement shall also be given
to each client, advising him/her of the risks and possible
consequences of body art procedures.
(1)
The name, address and phone number of the local Board of Health
that has jurisdiction and the procedure for filing a complaint.
(2)
An emergency plan, including:
A plan for contacting police, fire or emergency medical
services in the event of an emergency;
(a)
A telephone in good working order shall be easily available
and accessible to all employees and clients during all hours of
operation; and
(b)
A sign at or adjacent to the telephone indicating the correct
emergency telephone numbers.
(c)
(3)
An occupancy and use permit as issued by the local building
official.
(4)
(5) A current establishment permit.
(6) Each practitioner's permit.
D.
Establishment recordkeeping. The establishment shall maintain the
following records in a secure place for a minimum of three years, and
such records shall be made available to the Board upon request:
(1) Establishment information, which shall include:
E.
§ 307-5 BODY ART ESTABLISHMENTS § 307-5
307:737
(a) Establishment name;
(b) Hours of operation;
(c) Owner's name and address;
(d) A complete description of all body art procedures performed;
An inventory of all instruments and body jewelry, all sharps,
and all inks used for any and all body art procedures, including
names of manufacturers and serial or lot numbers, if
applicable. Invoices or packing slips shall satisfy this
requirement;
(e)
A material safety data sheet, when available, for each ink and
dye used by the establishment; and
(f)
(g) A copy of these regulations.
Employee information, which shall include:
(a) Full names and exact duties;
(b) Date of birth;
(c) Home address;
(d) Home /work phone numbers; and
(2)
Client information, which shall include:
(a) Name;
(b) Date of birth;
(c) Address of the client;
(d) Date of the procedure;
(e) Name of the practitioner who performed the procedure(s);
Description of procedure(s) performed and the location on the
body;
(f)
(g) A signed consent form as specified by § 307-6D(2); and
If the client is a person under the age of 18, proof of parental or
guardian identification, presence and consent including a copy
of the photographic identification of the parent or guardian
and a copy of the photographic identification of the client.
(h)
(3)
(4) Client information shall be kept confidential at all times.
The establishment shall require and ensure that all body art
practitioners obtain hepatitis B vaccination series. Records
F.
§ 307-5 BARNSTABLE CODE § 307-5
307:738
§ 307-6. Standards of practice.
Practitioners are required to comply with the following minimum health
standards:
documenting compliance with this requirement shall be provided to the
Board upon request.
A practitioner shall perform all body art procedures in accordance with
Universal Precautions set forth by the U.S. Centers for Disease Control
and Prevention.
A.
A practitioner shall refuse service to any person who may be under the
influence of alcohol or drugs.
B.
Practitioners who use ear-piercing systems must conform to the
manufacturers directions for use, and to applicable U.S. Food and Drug
Administration requirements. No practitioner shall use an ear-piercing
system on any part of the client's body other than the lobe of the ear.
C.
Health history and client informed consent. Prior to performing a body
art procedure on a client, the practitioner shall:
Inform the client, verbally and in writing that the following health
conditions may increase health risks associated with receiving a
body art procedure:
(a) History of diabetes;
(b) History of hemophilia (bleeding);
History of skin diseases, skin lesions, or skin sensitivities to
soaps, disinfectants etc.;
(c)
History of allergies or adverse reactions to pigments, dyes, or
other sensitivities;
(d)
(e) History of epilepsy, seizures, fainting, or narcolepsy;
Use of medications such as anticoagulants, which thin the
blood and/or interfere with blood clotting; and
(f)
(g) Any other conditions such as hepatitis or HIV.
(1)
Require that the client sign a form confirming that the above
information was provided, that the client does not have a condition
that prevents him or her from receiving body art, that the client
consents to the performance of the body art procedure and that
the client has been given the aftercare instructions as required by
§ 307-6K.
(2)
D.
A practitioner shall maintain the highest degree of personal cleanliness,
conform to best standard hygienic practices, and wear clean clothes
when performing body art procedures. Before performing body art
E.
§ 307-5 BODY ART ESTABLISHMENTS § 307-6
307:739
procedures, the practitioner must thoroughly wash his or her hands
in hot running water with liquid soap, then rinse hands and dry with
disposable paper towels. This shall be done as often as necessary to
remove contaminants.
In performing body art procedures, a practitioner shall wear disposable
single-use gloves. Gloves shall be changed if they become pierced, torn,
or otherwise contaminated by contact with any unclean surfaces or
objects or by contact with a third person. The gloves shall be discarded,
at a minimum, after the completion of each procedure on an individual
client, and hands shall be washed in accordance with Subsection E
before the next set of gloves is put on. Under no circumstances shall
a single pair of gloves be used on more than one person. The use
of disposable single-use gloves does not preclude or substitute for
handwashing procedures as part of a good personal hygiene program.
F.
The skin of the practitioner shall be free of rash or infection. No
practitioner affected with boils, infected wounds, open sores, abrasions,
weeping dermatological lesions or acute respiratory infection shall
work in any area of a body art establishment in any capacity in which
there is a likelihood that that person could contaminate body art
equipment, supplies, or working surfaces with body substances or
pathogenic organisms.
G.
Any item or instrument used for body art that is contaminated during
the procedure shall be discarded and replaced immediately with a
new disposable item or a new sterilized instrument or item before the
procedure resumes.
H.
Preparation and care of a client's skin area must comply with the
following:
Any skin or mucosa surface to receive a body art procedure shall
be free of rash or any visible infection.
(1)
Before a body art procedure is performed, the immediate skin area
and the areas of skin surrounding where body art procedure is to
be placed shall be washed with soap and water or an approved
surgical skin preparation. If shaving is necessary, single-use
disposable razors or safety razors with single-service blades shall
be used. Blades shall be discarded after each use, and reusable
holders shall be cleaned and autoclaved after use. Following
shaving, the skin and surrounding area shall be washed with soap
and water. The washing pad shall be discarded after a single use.
(2)
In the event of bleeding, all products used to stop the bleeding
or to absorb blood shall be single use and discarded immediately
after use in appropriate covered containers, and disposed of in
accordance with 105 CMR 480.000.
(3)
I.
Petroleum jellies, soaps, and other products used in the application of
stencils shall be dispensed and applied on the area to receive a body
J.
§ 307-6 BARNSTABLE CODE § 307-6
307:740
§ 307-7. Injury reports.
A written report of any injury, infection complication or disease as a result
of a body art procedure, or complaint of injury, infection complication or
disease, shall be forwarded by the operator to the Board which issued the
permit, with a copy to the injured client within five working days of its
occurrence or knowledge thereof. The report shall include:
§ 307-8. Complaints.
art procedure with sterile gauze or other sterile applicator to prevent
contamination of the original container and its contents. The applicator
or gauze shall be used once and then discarded.
The practitioner shall provide each client with verbal and written
instructions on the aftercare of the body art site. The written
instructions shall advise the client:
(1) On the proper cleansing of the area which received the body art;
To consult a health care provider for:
Unexpected redness, tenderness or swelling at the site of the
body art procedure;
(a)
(b) Any rash;
Unexpected drainage at or from the site of the body art
procedure; or
(c)
(d) A fever within 24 hours of the body art procedure; and
(2)
Of the address, and phone number of the establishment. A copy
shall be provided to the client. A model set of aftercare instructions
shall be made available by the Department.
(3)
K.
Contaminated waste shall be stored, treated and disposed in
accordance with 105 CMR 480.000: Storage and Disposal of Infectious
or Physically Dangerous Medial or Biological Waster, State Sanitary
Code, Chapter VIII.
L.
A. The name of the affected client;
B. The name and location of the body art establishment involved;
C. The nature of the injury, infection complication or disease;
The name and address of the affected client's health care provider, if
any;
D.
E. Any other information considered relevant to the situation.
§ 307-6 BODY ART ESTABLISHMENTS § 307-8
307:741
§ 307-9. Application for body art establishment permit.
The Board shall investigate complaints received about an establishment
or practitioner's practices or acts, which may violate any provision of
the Board's regulations.
A.
If the Board finds that an investigation is not required because the
alleged act or practice is not in violation of the Board's regulations,
then the Board shall notify the complainant of this finding and the
reasons on which it is based.
B.
If the Board finds that an investigation is required, because the alleged
act or practice may be in violation of the Board's regulations, the
Board shall investigate and if a finding is made that the act or practice
is in violation of the Board's regulations, then the Board shall apply
whatever enforcement action is appropriate to remedy the situation and
shall notify the complainant of its action in this manner.
C.
No person may operate a body art establishment except with a valid
permit from the Board.
A.
Applications for a permit shall be made on forms prescribed by and
available from the Board. An applicant shall submit all information
required by the form and accompanying instructions. The term
"application" as used herein shall include the original and renewal
a